Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/001443/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
Acharya Pujyapada Composed
Neel Parvat
Sarvarthasiddhi
Sitoda River
Padesh
Shalmali Tatkal
Chitrakoot) Yamak O
0 Yamak Vikt)
Siloda River
Nishpath Parvat
Sampaadan-Anuvaad
Siddhantacharya Pan. Phoolchandra Shastri
UPTEvion International
Mancibrary.org

Page #2:
---------------------------
The *Tattvartha Sutra* is an ancient text of Jain knowledge and is possibly the first text to introduce Jain principles in a systematic and concise manner in the form of sutras in Sanskrit. It is such a beautiful and authentic composition on its subject that no other text has been able to compare with it till date. The importance and glory of this text is also evident from the fact that it is equally popular among all sects of Jainism - Digambara, Svetambara, Sthanakvasi, etc. It is also an unparalleled text in Jain literature in terms of popularity. Many commentaries have been written on the *Tattvartha Sutra* from time to time. In the Digambara sect, its commentary *Sarvarthasiddhi* by Devanandi Pujyapada is considered to be the most ancient. It has been published many times, but this is its most authentic publication with a detailed Hindi commentary, based on a critical study of ancient manuscripts and fixing the text. Jain scholar Siddhantacharya Pt. Phoolchand Shastri has revealed the essence of *Sarvarthasiddhi* in the Hindi commentary of this edition. He has also discussed in detail the *Tattvartha Sutra* and its various aspects in the introduction.
An essential work for students of Jain philosophy and every seeker.

Page #3:
---------------------------
Shri Pujyapada Acharya-virachita Sarvarthasiddhi

Page #4:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #5:
---------------------------
Jñānapiṭha Mūrtidevi Granthamālā: Sanskrit Granthāṅka 13
Śrīmadācārya Pūjyapāda-viracita
Sarvārthasiddhi:
(Śrīmadācāryagṛddhapiṭcha-praṇītasya Tattvārthasūtrasya Vṛttiḥ)
Sampaadan-Anuvāda
Siddhāntācārya Paṁ. Phūlacandra Śāstrī
Bhāratīya Jñānapiṭha Prakāśana
Sātavā Saskarana: 1997 0 Mūlya: 150/- Rupaye

Page #6:
---------------------------
Bharatiya Jnanapith (Establishment: Falgun Krishna 6, Veer Ni. San. 2470: Vikram San. 2000: 18 February 1644)
Established by Late Sahू Shantiprasad Jain in the sacred memory of Late Punyashloka Mata Murtidevi
and supported by his wife Late Smt. Rama Jain
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala
Under this Granthamala, research-based editing and publication of Jain literature in various subjects like Agamic, philosophical, mythological, literary, historical, etc. available in ancient languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil, etc. is being done along with its original and as far as possible translation. Lists of Jain repositories, inscription collections, art and architecture, study-texts of distinguished scholars and public welfare Jain literary texts are also being published in this Granthamala.
Granthamala-Editor (First Edition)
Dr. Hiralal Jain, Don. A. N. Upadhye
Publisher
Bharatiya Jnanapith 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003
Printer Vikas Offset, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110032
All rights reserved

Page #7:
---------------------------
Jnanpith Moortidevi Granthamālā: Sanskrit Grantha No. 13
ACHARYA PUJYAPĀDA'S

SARVĀRTHASIDDHI
[The Commentary on Acharya Griddhapiccha's Tattvārtha-sūtra ]
Edited and Translated by
Siddhantacharya Pt. Phoolchandra Shastri
BHARATIYA JNANPITH PUBLICATION
Seventh Edition : 1997 Price: Rs. 150-00

Page #8:
---------------------------
## Bharatiya Jnanpith (Founded on Phalguna Krishna 9: Vira Sam. 2470, Vikrama Sam. 2000 : 18th Feb., 1944)
**Moortidevi Jaina Granthamala**

Founded by Late Sahu Shanti Prasad Jain
In memory of his late mother Shrimati Moortidevi
And promoted by his benevolent wife
Late Shrimati Rama Jain

In this Granthamala, critically edited Jaina Agamic, philosophical, Pauranic, literary, historical and other original texts available in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil etc., are being published in the respective languages with their translations in modern languages. Also being published are catalogues of Jaina-Bhandaras, inscriptions, studies on art architecture by competent scholars and also popular Jaina literature.

Published by Bharatiya Jnanpith
18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003
Printed at: Vikas Offset, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110032
All Rights Reserved

Page #9:
---------------------------
## Primary

The **Tattvartha Sutra** is one of the most ancient texts of Jainism and is possibly the first text in Sanskrit to introduce Jain principles in a concise and systematic way through aphorisms. This composition is so beautifully crafted that no other text has been able to match it till date. The glory of this text is further evident from the fact that it is equally popular among all sects of the Jain community - Digambara, Svetambara, Sthanakvasi, etc. In terms of popularity, it is an unparalleled text in Jain literature.

Many commentaries have been written on this text over time. In the Digambara sect, the **Sarvarthasiddhi** commentary by Devnandi Pujyapada is considered the most ancient. It has been published many times before. However, a critical study of ancient manuscripts to determine the text had not been attempted before. Pandit Phulchandra Shastri deserves our gratitude for his efforts in this direction.

The text was not originally edited and printed for publication by the Jnanapith, therefore the editors of this series had no role in its editing process. Panditji's preface, etc., was also written and printed independently. The views expressed in it regarding Malli Tirthankara, the authenticity of the Svetambara Agamas, etc., are Panditji's own and readers should view and understand them accordingly. From our perspective, it would have been better if these statements were not included in this text: because, as we have said above, this composition is popular throughout the Jain community, it is not limited to a particular sect. Therefore, it is more appropriate to present this text on that elevated platform. We hope and trust that readers will appreciate and utilize this publication with the same generous spirit.

- Hiralal Jain - Editor, Upadhye Granthamala (First Edition)

Page #10:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #11:
---------------------------
## Editorial (Third Edition)

1. **Sarvarthasiddhivriti**, written on the **Tattvarthasutra**, is the first commentary available in the entire Jain tradition. After a thorough study, it is certain that **Tattvarthadhigamabhashya** is a later work, composed between **Sarvarthasiddhi** and **Tattvarthavatika**. This is why criticism of many accepted sutras is found in **Tattvarthabhashya**, while there is no indication that **Tattvarthabhashya** was written before **Sarvarthasiddhivriti**. It is true that the **Angas**, known as **Acharangadi**, were composed before **Sarvarthasiddhi** was written in the Svetambara tradition. Otherwise, criticism of topics like **Kevalakavalaahar** would not be found in **Sarvarthasiddhi**.

This is the state of affairs. **Prajnakshu** **Swami Shri Pan. Sukhlalji** was well aware of this situation. Yet, looking at the preface of the third edition of **Tattvarthasutra** translated by him, it does not seem that he has changed his old views even slightly. However, we have learned from the teachings of Jain philosophy that **moksha** means liberation of the soul from **samyoga** and **samyoga-vritti** and becoming alone. And this is possible only when complete self-reliance is embraced both internally and externally. This is also the reason for our faith in the Digambara tradition. Therefore, while we accept this ultimate conclusion of Jain philosophy, we also accept the historicity of the related literature in the order in which it was written and published. We accept that the **Agam** literature of the Svetambara tradition was compiled in the 5th century AD. Therefore, it is clear that other supporting literature was written only after that. This is why the writers of the same sect have determined the time of writing of **Tattvarthadhigamabhashya** to be the first half of the 8th century.

After this general observation made from a historical perspective, we are now presenting here the necessary amendments made in the original and translation of the second edition of **Sarvarthasiddhi** in order.

**Second Edition**
**Jiva** always has **Jivatva**
**Page-50 13-30**

**Present Edition**
**Page-50** **Jiva** is always present compared to the general **Jivan**
**13-30** According to the purpose of the scriptures
**14-18** Both **Pramanas** and various **Nayas** in their form
**15-1**
**14-17**
**14-35**
Many forms of **Pramanas** and **Nayas** in the scriptures are considered only as **Jnana**
**15-30**
**Jnana** is considered only as **Jnana**
**15-31**

1. **Prithutarai iti keshamchit path: tamva 3-1. Athanye dharmaadharmakalaakaseshu anaadi: parinaama: aadimaan jivapudgaleshu iti vadanti. T.va.5-41 Vartika. 2. S.si. 6-131**

Page #12:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi
Page-50
Page-50
Second Edition Kshayopaśamika sufficient but ineligible Samyagdṛṣṭi Jīva
16-35 17-30 19-13
17-3 17-32
Present Edition Kshayopaśamika Samyagdṛṣṭi sufficient but Apāgatavedī Kṣayika Samyagdṛṣṭi and Kṛtakṛtya-vedaka Samyagdṛṣṭi Jīvas are present. In Avadhi-darśana, Asanyata-samyagdṛṣṭi etc. are present, which are Kṣīṇakṣayānta.
19-15
are present
13-10
23-13
From Sāsādana Samyagdṛṣṭi to Saṃyata-saṃyata, the number of Jīvas with Puruṣaved is the same as that which is common. From Pramatta-saṃyata to Anivṛtti, eight parts or fourteen parts, less than the country, one hundred and thirty-two only Kṣayopaśam
26-28 33-2 35-12 46-33 66-25 72-27 77-11 88-16
27-2 33-2 35-21 47-27 68-13 74-19 78-23
The subject of the country, the rise of the country-traitor competitors
The absence of the rise is encouraged by the rise of their Udeeraṇa Yogapravṛtti
112-14 112-16
90-17 114-14 114-16
From Sāsādana Samyagdṛṣṭi to Banivṛtti, eight, twelve, fourteen parts or less than the country, two hundred and sixty-four only increased Kṣayopaśam, without being present, receives the subject, the rise of the country-traitor competitors in the country, while the rise of the Sarvadhāti competitors does not occur due to the nature of the rise, the Yogapravṛtti of those prohibitions above the Udayavali is encouraged by the rise of Kṣayās. It is not right to say this solution, because it is the feeling of the Paryaya that has happened in front of the knowledge of the soul. All these together should be known as nine Yonis. In the middle, the Meru word is long to collect the middle part like the navel, and the expansion of the twenty-five front areas and mountains to the north and south
115-15
Solution of the soul
114-17
116-23
Paryaya of knowledge
126-12
128-16
Feeling is. Doubt
135-21
137-24 157-26
Meru word in the middle, collection-indicating
154-19 157-21
160-25
is long and five hundred
157-32
161-16
expansion of the front mountains and areas
162-15
less than
165-24
from staying, this is assumed
165-32
169-24
situation is and
192-36
from staying, this Prasada is two-storied, this is understood, the situation is, in Vijayādik, thirty-three Samaropama is the best situation and Spamiti
197-24 206-2
Rūpamati
200-13

Page #13:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi
## Second Edition
## Page-50 214-24
## Page-50 219-32
## 246-18
## 240-20 241-26
## 247-26 258-34
## 252-25
Pasatarupa Kavaayarahit. Kashay, meaning anger etc. Kashay, due to the passion of raga, the cause of being prone to pramaadika, the body of the upaya, even then, is called yogavrata and is svagat, and the visavadan is pargat. These are eight types of karma-prakritis, which are worthy of karma-skandha. Mantyam. Antyam Shuklam. Tatsami. It is unpleasant. Visha Samadhan - the purity of the results, by increase - the nature of avitayam, the special form of vibhuti.
## 259-30
## 253-22 307-20
-Mantyam. Tatsami Visha Samadhan - the increase of
## 341-11 342-21 356-27
## 315-35 351-11 352-19
## 367-27 368-23
- the nature of the form of Kerala.
## 357-25
## 2. Appendix-2
## Page 390 Number 17.1 - Under this, 'Tirashchinaam Kshayikam Nasti', the statement after this is not from Sarvarthasiddhi. This is clear from the fact that whoever is a Krityakrityavedak Samyagdristi or a Kshayik Samyagdristi, born in the four gatis, is born in the three gatis except the first hell. He is not born in the Napumsakavedis after death, nor in the Strivedis. If the original statement 'Tirashchinaam Kshayikam Nasti' was not there, there would have been no objection. But since this statement is present in all the handwritten manuscripts, we have kept it as it is in the original. Due to the presence of this sentence, the question arises in humans, in comparison to Bhavanatar, that there should have been a statement in the original that a Krityakrityavedak Samyagdristi and a Kshayik Samyagdristi are not born in the Manusyanis after death. But any Samyagdristi, after death, is born in the Purushavedis without exception, except the first hell, not in any other. This statement itself confirms the said statement.
## Page 395 Line 29, there is a missing 'ninety-nine thousand' after 'ninety-nine lakh', and the number of Sarvasanyatas given here is 299 in each Gunasthan of the four Gunasthanas of the Upshama category, and according to the Dakshina Pratipatti, 598 in each Gunasthan of the Kshapaka and the Ayogikaveli. Therefore, the total number of all the Sanayatas is 89999997. Therefore, the sum of the entire number from the Pramattasanyata is 89999997. As follows:
## Pramattasanyata 59398206 + 1 Apramattasanyata 29699103 + four Upshamaka 1196 + four Kshapaka 2392 + Sayogakevali 898502 + Ayogikaveli 598 = 89999997.
## It should be known here that the statement "Yadichait Ekasmim Samaye Sambhavanti" on page 395, line 19, is not meant to be the number of Sanayatas at any one time, but this number is said with a special intention. Because, neither is it possible for the number of their respective Gunasthanas to be obtained at the same time in each of the four Gunasthanas of the Upshamanika, nor is it possible for the number of their respective Gunasthanas to be obtained at the same time in each of the four Gunasthanas of the Kshapakshrenika. Yes, it is definitely possible for the number of their respective Gunasthanas to be obtained in each Gunasthan of the Upshamani and Kshapakani, respectively, at different times. Because, the beings who ascend to the eighth Gunasthan of these categories in eight times, they reach the ninth Gunasthan after a moment.

Page #14:
---------------------------
## सर्वार्थसिद्धि

This is a commentary on the text "Sarvarthasiddhi". It points out several errors and inconsistencies in the text and provides corrections. 

**Page 395, Line 14 (25-11):** The phrase "श्रेण्यसंख्येयभागप्रमिता:" seems to be missing after "सूक्ष्ममनुष्यं प्रति मनुष्या मिथ्यादृष्टयः". This is because the subsequent statement refers to both "manushya" (man) and "manuyini" (woman).

**Page 396, Line 9:** The phrase "तल्लक्षणसमचतुरस्ररज्जु" is difficult to understand in terms of "ghanarajju" (cube-rope). This is because the text defines "rajju" as an immeasurable number of yojanas (a unit of distance) in the sky, and the universe is said to be 343 "dhanarajju" (treasure-rope) in size. Therefore, in line 33 of the same page, "three hundred and forty-three rajju" should be corrected to "three hundred and forty-three dhanarajju".

**Page 396, Line 23:** The text states that the "Sāsādan" (a type of being) with "Samyagdṛṣṭi" (right faith) is born everywhere except in the fire-bodied, air-bodied, hellish, and all subtle beings. A verse is cited as evidence. However, it is important to note that this being is also not born in the "Vikalatraya" (three types of beings with disabilities), "Aparyāptakas" (insufficient beings), and "Asanjnīs" (unconscious beings). The verse mentions that this being is born in "Jinekaindriya" (one-sense beings), but at the time of birth, the "Mithyātvagunasthan" (false belief) arises.

**Page 399, Lines 1 and 3:** The phrase "Māraṇāntikādi" should be replaced with "Māraṇāntika" only. This is because the "Upāpad" (state of being) is not possible in the "Sanjatāsanjata" (state of being both restrained and unrestrained). Similarly, in line 4 of the same page, it is important to note that in the "Sanjatāsanjata" state, the "Śuklaleśyāma" (white and black) only has a "Māraṇāntika" (death-causing) "Samudghāta" (impact) and is slightly less than six divided by fourteen "rajju" (rope) in terms of "Sparśana" (touch). Also, in line 5, the phrase "Dyāpekṣayā" should be followed by "ṣaṭrajjavaḥ-spaṣṭāḥ".

**Page 399, Lines 35-36:** In the sentence "Sāsādanasya tatra sā na sambhavati", the word "sā" refers to the "Māraṇāntikādi" (death-causing) state and means that it is not possible.

**Page 401, Line 27 onwards:** To calculate the "Utkṛṣṭakāla" (superior time) for a single being with "Asanjatāsamyagdṛṣṭi" (unrestrained right faith), the "Dhavala" (a commentary on the Jain scriptures) states on page 347 that a being with the "Pramatta" (distracted) and other "Gunasthanas" (states of being) takes birth in the "Anattara Vimāna" (highest celestial abode) after spending a time equivalent to thirty-three "Sāgaropamas" (oceans). Then, after being expelled from there, the being takes birth as a human with an age equivalent to a "Pūrva-koṭi" (a very long period of time). When only an "Antarmūhurta" (a very short period of time) remains, the being abandons "Asanjama" (unrestrained conduct) and becomes "Sanjamī" (restrained). Thus, the "Utkṛṣṭakāla" obtained from this "Sanjama" (restraint) is one "Pūrva-koṭi" less than the "Antarmūhurta" and thirty-three "Sāgaropamas" less than the "Antarmūhurta".

**Page 402, Lines 42-1:** In the description of the "Utkṛṣṭakāla" for a "Pañcendriya Mithyādrṣṭi" (five-sense being with false belief), the "Pūrva-koṭi" (a very long period of time) is mentioned as 96. However, it should be 95 "Pūrva-koṭi" because the final time spent in the "Purushavedīs" (a type of celestial abode) is only seven "Pūrva-koṭi". Also, the text mentions that the being is born eight times as a "Pañcendriya Aparyāpta" (five-sense being with insufficient knowledge). However, this is not supported by the scriptures. The being is only born once as a "Pañcendriya Aparyāpta" in the middle. See "Dhavala" page 3681.

**Page 406, Lines 46-12, Line 33:** The text states that the being remains in the "Vedaka-Samyaktva" (state of knowing the right path) for sixty-six "Sāgaropamas" for the first time. However, it should be for sixty-six "Sāgaropamas" less than the "Antarmūhurta" for the first time as well, just like the second time. This is because, in the "Antarmūhurta", the being attains "Kṣāyika-Samyaktva" (state of gradually attaining right faith) and eventually becomes "Kṛtyakṛtya-Vedaka-Samyagdṛṣṭi" (one who knows the right and wrong actions). This is not the state that is being considered here.

**Page 411, Lines 59-9, 14 onwards:** The text uses the "Upacāra" (method of explanation) to prove that the "Samyagmithyātvagunasthan" (state of being both right and wrong belief) is "Kṣāyopaśamika" (a state of gradual decrease in wrong belief) and "Deśāghāti" (a state of being harmful to the world). However, the "Dhavala" on page 198 states that in the "Jātyantara-Svabhāva-Samyag

Page #15:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

**Page 416 (145.6, Line 23) onwards:** Those who are *charamashariri* (have attained the final body) have an *anpavarya* (imperishable) lifespan. This means that the lifespan they carry from their previous births, which enables them to pierce the cycle of births and deaths, does not increase in the final human existence. It is possible for their lifespan to undergo *apvartan* (reduction) according to their merit. However, the lifespan of a *charamashariri* being is *anpavarya*, therefore, it cannot be pierced by the use of fire, poison, etc. This is the rule. This rule is mentioned in the last sutra of the second chapter of the Tattvarthasutra. This is what should be understood here. The word "uttama" (best) used as an adjective in the said sutra should not be understood here as referring only to the body of the Tirthankaras in Sarvarthasiddhi, etc. But the body of everyone is the best because it is the final one. In the explanation of this sutra, Sarvarthasiddhi also states: "There is no difference in meaning in the acceptance of the best, which is the demonstration of the excellence of the final body."

**Page 427 (354-7, Line 32):** There are two types of *dashapurva* (those who have attained the ten previous stages of liberation): *abhinnakshara dashapurva* (those who have attained the ten previous stages without any change in their letters) and *bhinnakshara dashapurva* (those who have attained the ten previous stages with a change in their letters). Those who do not attain *moha* (delusion) upon studying the *dashapurva* in the presence of *Rohini* (a type of celestial being) and other great and small *vidya-devatas* (knowledge-deities) are called *abhinnakshara dashapurva*. And those who attain *moha* are called *bhinnakshara dashapurva*.

This is a brief description of the original *Sarvarthasiddhi-vritti*, its translation, and the special corrections that came to our attention in Appendix-2. There have been other corrections made in the translation, but they are either general or merely clarifications, so we have not included them in this description. However, we consider it appropriate to point out one or two things here. Because the term used in the scriptures should be used in the translation, etc. For example:

1. In the scriptures, the word *palyopam* is used to convey the knowledge of a specific number, not the word *paly*. Therefore, in our translation, we have accepted the word *palyopam* according to the original and used it everywhere in place of *paly*. Similarly, *sagaropama* has been used in place of *sagar*.

2. We have made this correction only in our translation. This correction has not been made in the translation of Appendix-2, so it should be understood there as well that *palyopam* should be used in place of *paly* and *sagaropama* in place of *sagar* according to the above method.

3. Other Translations: 1. We do not have complete information about how many other translations of *Sarvarthasiddhi-vritti* have been done. It is certain that the first one is the *Bhasha-Vachanika* by Pandit Shri Jaychandji Chavḍa. We have two editions of this. It is not clear from the printed copy where the first edition was printed, because several of its initial pages are missing from this copy. The second copy was printed by the Shruthabhandar and Granth Prakashan Samiti, Falton. Looking at it, it becomes clear that it is written in the form of *Bhasha-Vachanika*, therefore, even though it is a translation of *Sarvarthasiddhi-vritti*, Panditji has also made special clarifications from his side here and there. The printing method was not prevalent at that time, therefore, the manuscript copy on which Panditji wrote his *Bhasha-Vachanika* did not contain the text that we have separated from the original on page 17, note 1. It is certain that the text which states the touching of the three *leshya* (types of karma) of *Krishna* (a type of celestial being) and others, who are *samyagdrsti* (rightly seeing) with three *leshya*, by saying "Dwadashabhagaha kuto na labhyante" (Why are the twelve parts not obtained?), etc., while mentioning the touching of *leshya* in the context of *leshya margana* (the path of *leshya*) in comparison to *sparshan prarupana* (the form of touching), is present in the manuscript copy from which Panditji translated. But looking at the *sat* (being), *sankhya* (number), etc., *prarupana* (forms), it becomes clear that this text is not from the original *Sarvarthasiddhi-vritti*, and therefore, we have separated it from the original by giving it in note no. 1 based on the second manuscript copy from Delhi.

2. It seems that another *Bhasha-Vachanika* was also written by Pandit Shri Sadasuhaji, but we do not have it, so we are not shedding any special light on it.

Page #16:
---------------------------
## 8]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
3. Jagaroop Sahayaji, a lawyer residing in Eta, also undertook the task of writing a commentary on this. When the lawyer was preparing this commentary, I had left my position as a Dharma-Adhyapaka (religious teacher) at the Shri Syadvad Digambar Jain Mahavidyalaya. Therefore, the lawyer invited me to Delhi to make necessary revisions and improvements in the commentary, and I stayed there for a month and made the necessary revisions. However, after the work was completed, I had to leave without any support. He is also not present before us now, otherwise, I would have attempted to shed light on the special features of the commentary.

Apart from these three, I am not aware of anyone else who has written a Hindi translation of Sarvarthasiddhi or its language-commentary. Visheshukim Adhikam.

4. **Acknowledgement**
As I have already mentioned in the beginning, the edition of Sarvarthasiddhi-Vrittika with the erroneous translation that is before us is the second edition. The present edition is to be printed without any changes, except for the revisions we have made. We prepared this edition for printing at the behest of our esteemed brother Lakshmichandraji of the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, and we are deeply grateful to him. We are also particularly grateful to Dr. Gulabchandraji. It is due to his inspiration that we were able to revise and edit this edition in such a short period. In preparing this edition, we have meticulously compared the original text with the translation. And the necessary revisions have been made in both the original and the translation. We have also re-examined the preface word by word. It does not contain anything that is not supported by the Agamas. It can be tested against the yardstick of the Agamas at any time. It was on this very preface that we were not only welcomed and honored by the Vice-President of India with a certificate of appreciation at the Dil Loke Vigyan Bhavan, but we were also adorned with the honorary title of 'Siddhant Ratna'. All this is the result of the wisdom of the revered Acharya Vidyānanda Mahārāj, and we are deeply grateful to him. We wish that all the scholars in India who follow the Agamas should be welcomed and honored in the same way. This is a time of decline, and we sincerely hope that the tradition of scholarly scholars will continue uninterrupted. The revered Acharya possesses all the qualities, and his influence on society is unshakeable. If he takes this task in his hands, we do not see any reason why it will not be successful. We are confident that it will be successful.

5 July, 1983

Page #17:
---------------------------
**Shri Pujyapada Acharya Virachita**
**Sarvarthasiddhi:**

Page #18:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #19:
---------------------------
Two Words
1. Due to Editing
(From the First Edition)
It has taken a long time for Sarvarthasiddhi to be edited and published. About eight or nine years ago, during a special reading, it came to my attention that there are many places in Sarvarthasiddhi where some parts are doubtful to be considered its waste part. But when a sentence, phrase, word or part of a word becomes a part of the original text due to the carelessness of the scribe or other reasons, then it is quite difficult to separate it without any basis. I faced this problem even during the reading of Sarvarthasiddhi and as a result, I was inclined towards its editing.
It is clear that Acharya Pujyapada has explained the two sutras 'NirdessvAmitva' and 'Satsankhya' of the first chapter of Tattvarthasutra on the basis of Shatkhandagama. We will discuss this further in the introduction by writing a separate chapter. Here we only need to see if there is any laxity in the explanation of these sutras and if there are any signs of laxity, what is the reason for it?
While explaining the sutra 'NissvAmitva', Acharya Pujyapada has directed the master of Samyagdarshan with the shelter of all the four motions. There, in support of the absence of Kshayik Samyagdarshan in Tiryanchas, the following sentence is available in the previously printed copies:
'Kuta Ityukte Manusyah Karmabhumij Ev Darshanamohakshapana Praarambhako Bhavati. Apanapraarambhakalaparva Tiryaksha Baddhayushko'pi Uttanabhogabhamitiryakpurushavevo Utpadhyate Na Tiryastree Shu: Dravyavedastree Nanta Saan Kshayikasanbhavat. Evam Tirya Chamapya Paryapta Kanaan Kshayopashaamikam Jneyam Na Paryapta Kanaam.'
There is a directive of this type of rule in the Agamas of both Digambar and Svetambar traditions that Samyagdristi does not get born in the female bodies of any motion after death.
But in the Svetambar Agama, in the sixth Agama called Jnatadhakath, it is told from the context of the story of Mallinath Tirthankar that Mallinath Tirthankar had performed the karma called 'Stree Nama Karma' in his previous Mahabal bhav due to Maya Char, due to which he became a woman in the Paryaya of Tirthankar. And for this reason, the later Svetambar commentators have explained the above rule as 'Samyagdristi does not become a woman after death, this is with respect to Bahulya'.
Here we do not need to consider the context of this story, we only need to see what this 'Stree Nama Karma' is. Is it the 'Stree Ved' Nokshay out of the nine Nokshays or is it directed by Angopaang? When this karma is bound in the Paryaya of Mahabal, they were Samyagdristi Sadhu who bound the nature of Tirthankar and there is a rule of Karma Shastra that Samyagdristi's 'Stree Ved' is not bound because the binding of 'Stree Ved' is only up to the second Gunasthan. Therefore, this binding karma cannot be the 'Stree Ved' Nokshay. As for the matter of Angopaang, firstly, such a difference is not seen in Angopaang. The differences of Avantaar...
1. See Study 8. 2. Therefore, from this, Mahabal has been destroyed by this reason, this is the karma that destroys them. Jnata 0 Page 312.

Page #20:
---------------------------
##  [10]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

If we assume a distinction, even then, according to the principles of Karma Shastra, the binding of the unwholesome angopanga takes place in the Pramattasanyata and Apramattasanyata Gunasthanas. This is not possible because the binding and liberation of the unwholesome angopanga related to Strived is possible only up to the second Gunasthan. Therefore, in the present context, neither can this story from the Shatadharmakatha be considered as a basis, nor does it seem appropriate to say on this basis that "a Samyagdarshi Jiva does not take birth in Strivedis after death, this is said with respect to the majority."

After considering all these points, when we pay attention to the aforementioned statement of Sarvarthasiddhi, we have doubts about it. It points out the reason for the absence of Kshayik Samyagdarshan in Tiryanchis. It is clear that a human being who binds the Tiryanchayu and becomes Samyagdarshi, attaining Kshayik Samyagdarshan, is born in the Tiryancha of the Uttma Bhogbhumika, in the Purushavedi Tiryancha, not in the Strivedi Tiryancha. But the argument given in support of this, "Dravyavedastriṇām tāsaṁ sāyikāsam-bhavat," is not only flimsy but also misleading.

Based on this argument, the meaning of the entire sentence is that since Kshayik Samyagdarshan is not possible in Tiryancha Dravyavedi women, therefore, Kshayik Samyagdarshi Jivas are born only in the Tiryancha Purushas of the Uttma Bhogbhumika after death. Now, consider the entire context with a little more detail. The question is, in a way, the same as the solution. We need to consider why Kshayik Samyagdarshan does not occur in Tiryanchis. But it was sufficient to answer that if a bound Tiryancha human being attains Kshayik Samyagdarshan, then he is born in the Tiryancha Purushas of the Uttma Bhogbhumika after death, this is the rule. What was the need for the statement "Dravyavedastriṇām tāsaṁ kṣāyikāsam-bhavat" as a reason in support of it? This is what is called the same question and the same answer.

Secondly, the phrase "Dravyavedastriṇām" here is not in accordance with the Agama tradition and is therefore misleading, because the Agama classifies Tiryancha, Tiryanchini, and Manushya, Manushyani, and the basis of these terms is said to be the rise of Ved, Nokashaya.

We were faced with this question. We had been thinking for a long time whether this sentence is the original part of the text or whether it became a part of it later. Even after theoretical consideration, the main basis for its decision was the ancient handwritten copies. Accordingly, we started collecting copies from North India and South India and comparing the doubtful places with the printed copies. As a result, our assumption proved correct. Although this sentence is not absent in all the copies, there were some ancient copies in which this sentence was not available.

In the explanation of this sutra, another sentence "Kṣāyikaṁ punarbhavavedenaive" is printed. This sentence comes from the context of Manushyanis. It is stated that it is possible for sufficient Manushyanis to attain all three Samyagdarshans, but not for insufficient Manushyanis. This sentence was created to indicate that Kshayik Samyagdarshan of Manushyani is mainly said to be due to Bhavaved.

But it is clear that the term "Manushyani" in the Agama is used only for the Jiva of the Manushya Gati who has the rise of Strived. What is used in the world by the words Nari, Mahila, or Stri, according to the Agama, the meaning of the word Manushyani is different from that. In such a situation, if the above sentence is considered as the original, then two meanings of the word Manushyani have to be accepted. One meaning is the Manushyani who has the rise of Strived, and the other meaning has to be accepted as a woman, whether she has the rise of Strived or not.

Even such a woman who has the rise of Strived can be called Manushyani, and this sentence has come to prohibit her Kshayik Samyagdarshan. If this is said, then there seems to be no truth in this statement, because as we have said earlier, the word Manushyani is used in the Agama mainly in the sense of Bhavaved, therefore, it is fulfilled only in its own meaning. It is not its job to deal with other objections, it is mainly the subject of Charananuyoga.

Page #21:
---------------------------
Two Words
[11. We have also pondered over this sentence and researched it in all the copies. By comparing the copies, it was found that this sentence is not available in all the copies.
Similarly, a sentence comes in the Leshya chapter in the context of the explanation of the 'Satsankhya' etc. sutra. Which is as follows:
"Dvadashbhagaah kuto na labhyante, iti cet tatravashthitaleshyapekhya panchaiva. Athava yesham mate saasadanekendriyeshu notpadyate tanmatapekshya panchaiva."
The chapter is about the touch of the Saasadan Samyagdristi Jivas who have Krishna etc. Leshya. The Tiryanch and human Saasadan Samyagdristi Jivas do not get born in hell after death. Those who go to Devagati or come from Devagati do not have Krishna etc. inauspicious Leshyas. Those who come from hell have both Krishna etc. inauspicious Leshyas and Saasadan Samyagdarshan. In this regard, here the touch of the Saasadan Samyagdristi Jivas who have Krishna etc. three inauspicious Leshyas has been said to be slightly less than five out of fourteen Raju, slightly less than four out of fourteen Raju and slightly less than two out of fourteen Raju respectively. . This is the opinion of the Shatkhandagama. In Sarvarthasiddhi, the description of Sat, Sankhya and Kshetra etc. Anuyogadwaras has been done according to the Shatkhandagama only. The opinion of Kashayaprabhoot is different from this. According to him, the Saasadan Samyagdristi Jivas are also born in Ekendriyas after death. Therefore, in this regard, even though the touch of Saasadan Samyagdristi in Krishna Leshya may become slightly less than twelve out of fourteen Raju, but according to the intention of Shatkhandagama, this touch is not available in these Leshyas.
We had this question in front of us. Whenever our attention went to the sentence "Dvadashbhagaah kuto na lamyante iti adi vachya" in Sarvarthasiddhi, we would get into thought. The question was that if the Sarvarthasiddhikar wanted to discuss the difference of opinion, then why did he not mention this difference of opinion in other Anuyogadwaras like Satpraropa etc.? We paid attention to the solution of this sentence in many ways, but in the absence of a proper solution, we had to remain silent. This thought was definitely there that if the ancient copies of Sarvarthasiddhi are taken recourse to, then it is possible that this sentence may not be in them. We are happy to point out that our assumption turned out to be correct. The palm leaf copies we got from Madbidri do not have this sentence. On this basis, we can say with certainty that this sentence is also not of Sarvarthasiddhi.
First of all, the printing of the original Sarvarthasiddhi was done by Kallappa Bharmappa Nitbene from Kolhapur. The second printing was edited by Shri Motichandra Gotamchandra Kothari and was done from Solapur. And the third time, Shriman Pandit Vanshidharji Solapurwala edited and published it. Panditji has taken a lot of effort in editing it and this edition is more accurate than other editions. Still, the important points of doubt that we have drawn the attention of the readers to are still present in that edition.
The commentaries quoted below the Sarvarthasiddhi are also misleading at many places. For example, in Kalapraroopanam, the excellent time of Saasadan Samyagdristi is told to be the countless part of Aavali in comparison to various Jivas in Anaharakas. Commenting on this, the commentator writes:
"Aavali kaya asankhyeyabhaga iti - sa cha aavali kaya asankhyeyabhagaah samayamatralakshnatvat ekasamaya eva syat, aavlyaah asankhyatasamayalakshnatvat."
This means that that countless part of Aavali is only one time because it is a sign of one time, because there are countless times in one Aavali, therefore its countless part will be one time only.
It is clear that if the Acharyas wanted one time here, they would have indicated it by the word "one time" itself. The explanation of the time of the countless part of Aavali given in the Jeevasthan Kalanyogadwar is that many Saasadan Samyagdristi remained Anaharaka for two times by separating into two bodies and the third

Page #22:
---------------------------
##  [12] Sarvarthasiddhi

In the time period, other Sasadan Samyagdrsti, by becoming Anaharak, performed two Diras. In this way, continuously, for an innumerable number of Avaliks, the Jivas remained Anaharak for two time periods. Therefore, by multiplying the number of Avaliks by two, the total time period of Anaharak Sasadan Samyagdrsti is obtained (Jivasthan Pu. 4).

In most of the handwritten manuscripts, it is observed that, to clarify the subject matter, verses, gathas, phrases, or independent commentaries from other texts are added on many pages from the back, and over time, they become part of the text. This anomaly has occurred to a very large extent in Sarvarthasiddhi. We have already presented three such examples at the beginning of this statement. It must be said that this is the ingenuity of some commentator, and he must have written these sentences in the margin as footnotes to clarify the subject matter from his perspective, and later, while preparing another copy from it, they became part of the original text. Apart from this, there are many other phrases or gathas that are not available in most of the handwritten manuscripts, and removing them does not cause any harm to the subject matter. Here, we are presenting two or three examples of such useful phrases that were present in the ancient editions and have been separated from this edition.

1. In some copies, in the commentary of the first sutra of the third chapter, the text 'Dhanam cha Ghano Mandho Mahan Ayat Ityartha:' etc. is available. This text has also been published in the printed editions so far. In the copies that were before us, this text is not present in most of the copies, and considering the commentary, it does not seem to be of the commentator, therefore, this text has not been given above, but has been shown in the commentary below.

2. At the end of the explanation of Malapariṣaha of the ninth sutra of the ninth chapter, 'Keshalanchasamskarabhyamutpannakhevasahanam Malasamanayasahane'ntarbhavatiti na prithaguuktam.' This sentence is available in the printed editions. But this sentence is not found in the handwritten copies that were before us. Considering the sentence structure, it does not seem to be of Sarvarthasiddhi. Also, after describing the nature of any Pariṣaha, there is no practice of further clarification regarding that Pariṣaha in Sarvarthasiddhi, therefore, we have not included this sentence in the original text, but have shown it separately in the commentary.

3. Special Features of the Text Accepted in the Present Edition

We have already mentioned that many editions of Sarvarthasiddhi have been published before the present edition. In such a situation, we faced great difficulty in accepting or rejecting any text during the editing of the present edition. Generally, we have kept in mind that the texts available in the printed editions should be given priority first. But we could not follow this rule everywhere. If we found suitable texts from other handwritten manuscripts, we did not hesitate to accept them.

4. Introduction to the Manuscript

There were many other things that made us decide to re-edit it based on several ancient manuscripts. For this, we obtained two palm leaf manuscripts from Moodbidri, two handwritten manuscripts from the Delhi Bhandar, and one handwritten manuscript from the Jain Siddhant Bhavan, Ara. From the printed editions, we had the editions edited by Shri Pan. Kallappa Bharmappa Nitave and Shri Pan. Vanshidharji Solapur. In this work, one palm leaf manuscript from Moodbidri and one handwritten manuscript from the Delhi Bhandar proved to be particularly useful. These were more accurate than other copies. Still, we could not consider any one as the main one in the form of an ideal manuscript. We cannot say that the present edition of Sarvarthasiddhi is final in all respects, but while editing it, this point was definitely kept in mind.

Page #23:
---------------------------
Two Words
[13

It has been made as accurate and traditional as possible according to the Agamas.
Before introducing the copies, we would like to clarify that it took an inordinate amount of time for Sarvarthasiddhi to come to light. During this long period, we had to make many changes and faced many obstacles. As a result, we were unable to keep all our documents safe. We lost many useful documents, which caused us great loss. These documents also included the introduction to the copies, so the complete introduction to the copies that we had written is not available to us at this time. The copies on which we based this work are also not available to us. Nevertheless, thanks to our friends Shri Pandit K. Bhujabaliji Shastri Moodbidri and Pandit Darbarilalji Nyayacharya Delhi, we are providing here the introduction to the copies of the said places that we have obtained.
(1) Ta.—This is a palm leaf manuscript from Moodbidri. The script is Kannada. There are 116 leaves in total. Each page has 10 lines and each line has about 71 characters. The copy is clean and in good condition. Saraswati Gachchha, Balatkar Gan Kundakundanvaya's A. Vasundhara completed the script on Bhadrapaada Krishna Pratipada, Shalika Shaka 1551, Vilambi Samvatsara. This was the oldest of the copies available to us. Its code is Ta.
(2) Na.—This is also a palm leaf manuscript from Moodbidri. The script is Kannada. There are 101 leaves in total. Each page has 9 lines and each line has about 107 characters. The copy is clean and in good condition. It does not mention the scribe or the date of writing. Its code is Na.
(3) Di. 1 This is a handwritten copy of Di. Jain Saraswati Bhandar Dharmpura Delhi, located in the new temple of Shri Lala Harsukhray Suganchandji. The number of leaves is 201. Each leaf has 18 lines and each line has about 33 characters. The length of the leaf is 11 inches and the width is 5 inches. The copy has been made in the middle, leaving one inch margin on all sides. The paper is strong, the characters are also very beautiful, which can be read easily without any difficulty. The writing work was completed on Ashadha Sudi 11, Thursday, Samvat 1752. The following eulogy is available at the end of the copy:
'Pranipatya Jinavrendram Varavigraharooparanjitasurendra. Sadgunasudhasamudra Vakyase Staam Prasastimhaan. . . . . Jagatsare Hi Sare'sminnahimsajalasaagare. Nagare Nagarakiarna Vistirnapanapannyake. . . 2|| Ch. Samvat 17521 Varshe Ashadha Sudi 11 Gurau Lishayitadhyatmaratparasaseshjnaanavaraneekshayarth Likhitam.'
Its code is Di. 1.
(4) Di. 2 This is also a handwritten copy from the aforementioned place. The number of leaves is 111. Each leaf has 12 lines and each line has about 50 characters. Only the first and last leaves have fewer lines. The length of the leaf is 11 and a quarter inches and the width is 5 inches. The copy has been made leaving one and a quarter inch margin on the sides and three-quarters of an inch margin on the top and bottom. The writing at the end of the copy indicates that this copy was completed on Tuesday, Ashwin Vadi 14, Samvat 1875. The writing is as follows:
'Samvat 1875 Masottamamase Ashwinimase Krishnapakse Tithau Cha Shubh Chaturdashi Bhamiwasarena Likhitam Jaisinghpuramadyhe Piragadasa Mohaka Jainee Bhai.'
It is evident from seeing this copy that it was probably written based on Di. 1. The copyist is Shri Piragadasa Ji Jain and it was prepared while sitting in the Narasimhapur (New Delhi) Jain temple. Its code is Di. 2.
Apart from these copies, there is a fifth copy from Shri Jain Siddhant Bhavan Ara. These copies were used during the reading. And during the printing, a copy from Khimalasa village, which falls under Sagar district of Madhya Pradesh, was also available. This village was once a prosperous town. It is located on the road from Bina Etawah to Malthaun and is about 12 miles away from Bina Etawah. Ancient records indicate that its ancient

Page #24:
---------------------------
## 14]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
The name is Kshemollas. Khimlasa is its corrupted form. The rampart and ruins around the city are evidence of the prosperity of the ancient city. The Jain temple here is worth seeing. It has a Saraswati Bhavan which still houses many ancient handwritten copies of scriptures.

4. The reason for the delay in publication is that we edited it independently. We had to gather the necessary materials for editing ourselves. Once the work was underway, we hoped to publish it very soon. One or two literary organizations were also ready to publish it, but matching the text from multiple copies, adding annotations, and translating it took longer than we expected. As a result, the work fell behind schedule. Meanwhile, in VS 2003, the Shri Ganesh Prasad Varni Jain Granthamala was established to honor the services of the revered Shri 105 Kshu. Ganesh Prasadji Varni, and it was decided that Sarvarthasiddhi would be published under this Granthamala. Accordingly, it was given to Shri Bhargav Bhushan Press for printing. However, due to the press's delay and the emergence of other urgent tasks before the Granthamala, its publication was delayed considerably.

5. This year, we were just about to complete the printing when, on the one hand, the institution accepted the task of writing a history of Jain literature, and on the other hand, several other financial and other obstacles arose before the Granthamala, which, keeping in mind, the Granthamala, with my consent, stopped its publication and gave me the right that if the Indian Knowledge Institute could complete this work, then this book would be gratefully handed over to the Indian Knowledge Institute on proper grounds. Keeping in mind the intention of the Granthamala, I discussed this matter with the worthy minister of the Indian Knowledge Institute, Shriman Pan. Ayodhyaprasadji Goyali. Goyali ji gave only one answer that if the Shri G. Varni Jain Granthamala is facing difficulties in publishing Sarvarthasiddhi due to lack of funds or any other reason, then the Indian Knowledge Institute will not let it remain unpublished. It will not only complete the remaining work after printing, but will also happily return the expenses incurred by the Varni Granthamala on it. Generally, we considered it very difficult to get this work done from the Indian Knowledge Institute before the discussion, because the sequence and special features of its publications, we found a lot of lack in the printed forms of Sarvarthasiddhi. But we are extremely happy to point out here that nothing stood in the way of this. This not only introduced us to the generous heart of Shri Goyali ji, but it is also a clear example of the vast vision that is adopted in the operation of the Indian Knowledge Institute.

6. Some of our friends and well-wishers, who have provided financial and other assistance to the Granthamala in its publication, will be surprised to see that Sarvarthasiddhi has been published by the Indian Knowledge Institute. But it is a very small question as to which institution is publishing this book. The only thing they need to see is whether the money or other assistance they have given for the betterment of literature is being used properly or not. Generally, different institutions are established for the convenience of management and workers. But they are all branches of the same great tree. It doesn't matter which fruit is on which branch. What matters is...

Page #25:
---------------------------
Two Words
[15
So the question is whether every branch and twig of that great tree, and its other parts, are performing their proper functions in their respective places. The insistence on name and form has never been desirable in the Jain tradition, and should not be. It is given a place only for the conduct of behavior. Therefore, whether the publication of Sarvarthasiddhi was done by the Varni Granthamala or by the Bharatiya Gyanpith, both things are one.
7. Expression of Gratitude Still, it seems absolutely necessary to express our gratitude in a few words to our colleagues, friends, and well-wishers from many perspectives. It is a definite fact that the Jain community has not paid as much attention to the publication of Jain literature as it should have. In ancient times, both the establishment of temples and the recording of scriptures and their establishment here and there were considered equal. Until now, the protection of scriptures has been done through this method. Our ancestors, whether they were knowledgeable about those scriptures or not, considered it their sacred duty to protect the scriptures by having them copied, and they were also engaged in this work, but since the printing work began, in a way, society has closed its eyes to this. Now, let alone copying, they have become hesitant to even buy a single printed copy of them. Forget about spending money personally, they don't even want to accomplish this work with public funds, while they continue to use this money for other showy and temporary works. Their argument is that who here understands such large books? What will we do by keeping them in the temple? If the ancient men had worked with this same logic, would it have been possible to protect literature? It is difficult to say that we have saved all our literature. However, whatever has been saved is enough. This literature is the only means capable of establishing a direct connection with the life and teachings of Lord Mahavira. Therefore, it becomes the duty of every householder to use every possible means to protect it.
It is a matter of joy that the founders and other workers of the Bharatiya Gyanpith have paid sufficient attention to this, and without considering whether the expenses incurred on its publication etc. will be recovered or not, they are paying attention to the publication of all kinds of ancient literature. The publication of Sarvarthasiddhi by the Bharatiya Gyanpith is the result of their same auspicious sentiment, therefore, we consider it our duty to express our gratitude to them first in humble words. As the editor of Sarvarthasiddhi, it is our duty to do this work, and as the conductor of the Varni Granthamala, we also have to perform it.
Shri G. Varni Jain Granthamala is an institution that has the support of the well-established scholars of society, therefore, the publication of Sarvarthasiddhi by it was not a difficult task, yet considering the difficult situation it faced, the way it has made a commendable start, we consider it our duty to express our gratitude to the management committee of the Varni Granthamala.
Here, we also consider it our duty to express our gratitude to those great souls who, due to their interest in the publication of only Sarvarthasiddhi, had given their generous assistance to the Varni Granthamala. The generous donors are:
1. Shriman Bro. Lakshmichandraji Varni, by the advice of the revered Shri 108 Acharya Suryasagarji Maharaj. Varniji had sent 1500) for this work from the society of Delhi's Pahari Dheeraj and Deputyganj.
2. Babu Ramswaroopji Baruasagar, the treasurer of the Varni Granthamala. You had provided 1601) for this work.
3. The generous-minded Shriman Nemchand Balchandji Sa. Vakil Usmanabad. Your granddaughter Bro. Gajrabai had come to Banaras to study Labdhisar Kshapanasar, and she stayed here for about two months. As a result, inspired by sister Gajrabai, Vakil Sa. had given 1000) to the Granthamala.

Page #26:
---------------------------
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

We are grateful to Shriman Pannalalji Agrawal, Delhi, Pan. Nemichandraji Jyotishacharya Jain Siddhant Bhavan, Ara, Pan. K. Bhujabaliji Shastri, Moodbidri, and Pan. Darbarilalji Kothia Nyayacharya, Delhi, for their complete assistance in obtaining the handwritten manuscripts.

The Manager of the Bharatiya Jnanpith, Shri Babulalji Fagu, has been working tirelessly to make its publications beautiful and attractive. He has also helped us in making Sarvarthasiddhi worthy and in providing other types of assistance, for which we are grateful.

The appendix and index of Sarvarthasiddhi have been prepared by our classmate, Pan. Hirananji Shastri, and are included with necessary revisions. We are eternally grateful to him.

[16]

Sarvarthasiddhi is the first commentary on the Tattvartha Sutra among the available commentaries. It examines the subject matter from all perspectives, including scriptural, philosophical, etc. We hope that this edition will further enhance its value in society.

- Phulchandra Siddhantashastri

Page #27:
---------------------------
## Introduction (From the First Edition)

"Who am I, what is my nature, where did I come from, what is conducive to me, and how is it attained? The human being who does not contemplate these things is not capable of attaining their destination."

Acharya Vadi Singh has said these words in the Kshatracharamaṇi in the context of Tattvajñāna. This clearly conveys the duty of a human being. The contemplation of duty is the essence of life. Even those who are Tiryanch consider their duty and act accordingly, so the case of humans is even more significant.

In the life of every being, we see such extraordinary transformations that are unimaginable. Why does this happen? Is the external environment the only reason for this? A father has two children. They are raised in the same way. They receive education in the same school, yet there is a remarkable difference in their character and temperament. Why? There must be some unknown reason besides their physical structure. The seekers have deeply pondered this question. In response, they have given the world this experience: due to the karmas accumulated according to the inherent capabilities of the being, such diversity is seen in the lives of beings.

Observing the diversity of the world, they have said that the first state of this being is Nigoda. From time immemorial, this being has been eligible for this state. It is as rare to find a grain of sand in a vast expanse of sand as it is to escape from this state and attain another state. There is no count of other states. It is as rare for this being to become Panchendriya while wandering through them as it is for a human being to attain the quality of gratitude even after acquiring all other qualities. Even if it becomes Panchendriya, it does not benefit it much, because the state of being a human being is the only state where it can gather all the means for its progress. But attaining this is very difficult. The seekers have expressed this in these words through an example. They say that just as it is rare to find a heap of jewels placed on a crossroads, it is equally rare to find the human state while wandering through other states. Even if it attains the human state, it is even rarer to follow the path of duty by understanding its duties and non-duties.

Being human, this being gets entangled in countless attachments. Sometimes it worries about its children, wife, and home, and sometimes it spends its time worrying about its prestige. Its mind is not even slightly attracted towards self-realization. It worries about what is not its own, and it does not even look at what is its own. The result is that it does not cherish this rare human state with pride, but due to the lack of understanding of the right duty, it has to become eligible for endless torments again.

Page #28:
---------------------------
##  **Sarvarthasiddhi**

How can this being be liberated from this state? In response to this question, seekers have shown many paths, of which the study of **Samyak Shruta** is the most important. Shruta is of two types: one that guides towards fulfilling worldly desires, and the other that, by showing the path of **vishaya** and **kashaya** as inappropriate, sets one on the path of self-benefit. What is the benefit of the soul? If we have to get the answer to this question in brief, it can only be said that it is '**moksha**'. Therefore, the scripture that has a proper understanding of the means of attaining moksha is eligible to be called **Samyak Shruta**.

From this perspective, when we look at ancient literature, our attention first goes to the **Dwadashanga Shruta**. It has a direct connection to the words of **Lord Mahavira**. It is a fact that all **Tirthankaras** preach the meaning, and their chief disciples, who are called **Ganadharas**, create **Anga Shruta** in the form of scriptures. This is mainly divided into twelve sections, hence it is called **Dwadashanga**, and because it is composed by the chief heads of the Sangha, the **Ganadharas** - **Ganis**, it is also called **Ganipitaka**.

After **Lord Mahavira** attained **moksha**, there were three **Anubaddha Kevalis** and five **Shruta Kevalis**. The last **Shruta Kevali** was **Bhadrabahu**. Until him, this **Anga Shruta** came in its original form. After that, due to the gradual decline of **buddhibal** and **dharanashakti**, and the lack of a tradition of writing down scriptures, it gradually became fragmented. Thus, on the one hand, while the **Anga Shruta** was disappearing, on the other hand, efforts were also being made to keep the **Shruta** tradition unbroken and to maintain its direct connection to the words of **Lord Mahavira**.

After **Anga Shruta**, the second place is given to **Ananga Shruta**. It is also called **Anga Bahya**. Its main divisions are: **Samayik, Chaturvishati Stav, Vandana, Pratikraman, Vanayik, Kritikarma, Dashakalik Uttaradhyayana, Kalpavyavahar, Kalpyakalpya, Mahakalypa, Pundarika, Maha Pundarika, and Nishiddvika**. Out of these, **Sarvarthasiddhi** mentions only **Uttaradhyayana** and **Dashakalik**. Based on the **Shri Dhavala Tika**, it is known that these were also composed by the **Ganadharas**, and they were present during the existence of **Anga Shruta**. But gradually, due to the lack of **Shramanas** who could hold them like **Anga Shruta**, they also disappeared. As a result, in the **Svetambara** tradition, which is completely deprived of the original **Shruta**, the **Acharaanga** etc. **Anga Shruta** and **Uttaradhyayana** etc. **Ananga Shruta** that are available are a collection from after the fifth century Vikram, therefore, it cannot be considered particularly useful from the perspective of the original **Shruta**. Thus, it took a total of 683 years for the **Anga Shruta** and **Anga Bahya Shruta** to become fragmented.

But this does not mean that we did not receive any form of inheritance of the words of **Lord Mahavira**, or the **Dwadashanga** words, in later times. During the time of **Bhadrabahu Shruta Kevali**, the Jain tradition was divided into two 'parts'. The first tradition, which accepted the **tattvajnanamulak** conduct of **Lord Mahavira** and his previous **Tirthankaras** without any modification, was known at that time as the **Digambara** tradition or the original platform, and the one that, due to circumstances, made modifications and introduced new conduct, became known as the **Pravetambara** tradition. Due to this, the original **Anga Shruta** and **Ananga Shruta** could not be written down, but over time, there have been **Acharyas** who have tried to protect the **Shruta** with the help of **Anga Shruta**. The composition of **Shatkhandagam** and **Kashaya Prabhriti** is the first among those efforts. **Acharya Kundakunda**, who lived around the same time, by his spiritual style, while considering the **jivadi** elements and the conduct in accordance with the path of **moksha**, not only tried to protect the independent path of the **Tirthankaras**, but also brought a lot of stability to it. In this way, many efforts have been made by **Arayatiya Acharyas** to create **Shruta** in accordance with the original **Shruta** and to protect it. The **Shruta** that can be counted first in the entire Jain tradition from the perspective of composition is described briefly as follows:

Page #29:
---------------------------
## Introduction

**Book Name:** Shatkhandagama
**Author:** Acharya Pushpadanta Bhootbali
**Time of Composition:** Second century BCE or earlier

**Kshayaprabhrut:** Acharya Gunadhar
**Contemporary Kshayaprabhrut:** Acharya Yativrishabha, who lived some time after Acharya Gunadhar.
**Samayaprabhrut, Pravachansaraprabhrut:** Acharya Kundakunda, who lived in the first and second centuries BCE.
**Panchaastikayaprabhrut, Niyamsar and Ashtaprabhrut Mulaachar (Aacharaang):** Acharya Vattakeer
**Contemporary of Acharya Kundakunda:** Acharya Sivary, author of Mulaaradhana (Bhagavati Aaradhana) and Tattvarthsutra.
**Contemporary or slightly later than Acharya Kundakunda:** Acharya Giddhapicchi
**Contemporary or slightly later than Acharya Kundakunda:** Acharya Samantabhadra, author of Ratnakaranḍa Shravakaachar.

After Acharya Kundakunda, there were many efforts to preserve the scriptures. The compilation of the Shvetambar Angascriptures is one of those efforts. It was compiled and put into book form in the 6th century CE.

**1. Tattvarthsutra:** Among these, we need to consider the Tattvarthsutra. It is the main text of Jain philosophy. It discusses all aspects of Jain conduct and Jain philosophy in a sutra style. It is certain that Jain

**1.** There is a lot of debate about the time of these individuals. Veerasen Swami has written that they were disciples of Vaachaka Aryamanksu and Nagahasta. Both of these are mentioned in the Shvetambar Pattavalis. It is possible that these and Aryama and Nagahasta mentioned in the Shvetambar tradition are the same person, and they appear to be the guru of Acharya Yativrishabha. In the Dhavala commentary of Jeevasthan Kshetrapramananugama, Acharya Veerasen has mentioned a Tiloayapanṇatti which is different from the current Tiloayapanṇatti. It is possible that some part of it has been included in the current Tiloayapanṇatti, but this does not prove their identity. Pandit Jugalkishorji Mukhtar, in the introduction to the Puratan Jain Vakyasuchi, has tried to refute my article published in an issue of Jain Siddhant Bhaskar, which attempts to prove the identity of the current Tiloayapanṇatti with the ancient Tiloayapanṇatti. This cannot be called a proper attempt, because the current Tiloayapanṇatti does not mention the size of the universe as discussed in the ancient Tiloayapanṇatti. Based on this, it seems completely appropriate to believe that the position of Acharya Yativrishabha based on the calculation of the reign period based on the current Tiloayapanṇatti is also not appropriate. For this, it will first have to be proven that this calculation of the reign period is also found in the ancient Tiloayapanṇatti, only then this belief will be considered appropriate that Acharya Yativrishabha lived a thousand years after Mahavira Samvat. According to the immediate mention in Dhavala, Acharya Yativrishabha should be considered to be of the same time as those two great Acharyas who adorned this earth, as he was a disciple of Mahavaachaka Aryamanksu and Nagahasta.

**2.** Indranandi has also mentioned the commentary of Acharya Kundakunda on Shatkhandagama in his Shrutavatar. Based on this, the time of composition of Shatkhandagama is before the first century. Most thinkers place these texts after a tradition of 683 years, but in my opinion, the purpose of showing the order in which the tradition of Shruta came is only to show that. If the authors of Shatkhandagama etc. lived 683 years ago, there is no objection to it.

Page #30:
---------------------------
**The Sarvarthasiddhi**

The primary language of the **Kagama-mathu** has been Prakrit, and the **Shruta** (scriptural texts) compiled by the Indian **Acharyas** (teachers) outside of Bengal is also mostly written in Prakrit. The various forms of Prakrit that are available confirm that it was the language of the common people for a long time, even before the time of Lord Mahavira and after. Pali, in which important ancient Buddhist literature is available, is a dialect of Prakrit. From the beginning, the Jains and Buddhists have had a nature to teach the common people in their language. As a result, they have done most of their literary work in the language of the people, Prakrit. But gradually, with the dominance of Brahmanism in India and their literary language being Sanskrit, the Buddhists and Jains were forced to write their useful literature in Sanskrit as well. This is why the important text **Tattvartha Sutra** was written in Sanskrit. This is the first text written in Sanskrit in the Jain tradition. There is no definite evidence that Jain literature was written in Sanskrit before this. The **Tattvartha Sutra** is a short **Sutra** text, but it contains a good collection of **Pramays** (principles). For this reason, it has been adopted equally by all the sects of the Jain tradition. It has been equally well-received in the philosophical world as well as the spiritual world. From this point of view, the **Tattvartha Sutra** is considered to be as important in the Jain tradition as the **Gita** is to the Vedic people, the **Bible** to the Christians, and the **Quran** to the Muslims. Most Jains recite it daily, and some recite one chapter of it every day on the **Ashtami-Chaturdashi** days of the **Dasha-lakshana Parva**, which is listened to with great devotion by the common people. It is said that whoever recites it once in their lifetime gets the benefit of a fast.

**Name**

The main name of this **Sutra** text is **Tattvartha**. This name is mentioned by its main commentators. In the **Sarvarthasiddhi**, this sentence appears at the end of each chapter:

"**Iti Tasyarthavritta, Sarvarthasiddhishikayaam Adhyayah Samaptas**" (Thus ends the meaning of this, in the **Sarvarthasiddhi** commentary).

At the end of the **Sarvarthasiddhi**, there are three verses of praise, in which the present commentary is called **Tattvarthavritti**, and the name of the present text is declared as **Tattvartha**. The same is the case with the **Tattvarthavartika** and the **Tattvartha Shloka-vartika**. In the first auspicious verse of both these commentary texts, and in the concluding verses of each chapter, the same name of the original text is mentioned.

There are seven **Tattvarthas** - **Jiva**, **Ajeeva**, **Asava**, **Bandha**, **Samvara**, **Nirjara**, and **Moksha**. The present **Sutra** text elaborates on these seven **Tattvarthas** in relation to **Samyagdarshan** (right faith). It seems that this is why it got the name **Tattvartha**.

In the common world, it is also known as **Tattvartha Sutra**. This name is mentioned by **Vira Sena Swami** in his famous commentary **Dhavla**. **Siddhasena Gani** also mentions this name in the concluding verses of some chapters in his commentary. It seems that it got its second name **Tattvartha Sutra** because it discusses the seven **Tattvarthas** (Jiva, etc.) in the style of a **Sutra**. But since the word **Sutra** is added to the previous name, it is possible that both names are the same. It is possible that the name **Tattvartha Sutra** is used only for convenience.

Page #31:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**21**

It has been mentioned elsewhere as 'Tattvarth' and also as 'Sattvarthsutra'. It is an old practice to refer to an object by mentioning a part of its name, and to convey its meaning. It is very likely that this is how it got the name 'Tattvarth'. Siddhasen Ganini has mentioned it by both the names 'Tattvarthsutra' and 'Tattvarth'. This also confirms that both names refer to the same thing.

**Introduction**

One of its names is also 'Moksha Shastra'. We have not seen this name mentioned by ancient commentators or anyone else. However, it is widely known in the public. The 'Tattvarthsutra' begins with the teachings of the path to liberation and ends with the teachings of liberation. It seems that this is why it has gained such popularity.

After 'Sarvarth Siddhi', 'Tattvarthbhahya' is considered to be its second important commentary. This verse appears in its 'Uththaniaka':

"Tattvarthabhigamasya barsha sangraham laghupram yam. Vakyami shishya hita mim adra vanakadeshasya || 2 ||"

Meaning: I am speaking this short treatise called 'Tattvarthadhigam', which is full of meaning and a collection of its own part, for the benefit of the students.

The praise that is available at the end of 'Tattvarthbhahya' also mentions the name 'Tattvarthadhigam'. Based on this, it is said that its main name is 'Tattvarthadhigam'.

However, even with this basis, we have doubts about this being the name of the original sutra text. Firstly, these verses of 'Uththaniaka' and the praise found at the end of the commentary are not part of the original sutra text, but are part of the commentary, and the commentary is a work done after the sutra was composed. Secondly, the independent copy of the commentary available with 'Tattvarthsutra' does not indicate through the concluding flower verses of each chapter that the commentator Umaswati considers 'Tattvarthbhahya' to be different from 'Tattvarthadhigam'. The concluding flower verse of the first chapter is as follows:

"Iti Tattvarthadhigame arhatpravachan sangrahe prathamo adhyayah samaptas."

Generally, if a concluding flower verse is written for a chapter of an independent text, it only mentions the name of the original text and indicates the end of the chapter. And if a concluding flower verse is written for a chapter along with the commentary, it mentions the name of the original text, or without mentioning it, mentions the name of the commentary and indicates the end of the chapter. For example, the concluding flower verse of a chapter of 'Tattvarthsutra' is available as follows:

"Iti Tattvarthsutre prathamo adhyayah samaptas."

Similarly, the concluding flower verse of 'Tattvarthsutra' along with the commentary is as follows:

"Iti Tattvarthvrittau Sarvarthsiddhisanjnakaayaam prathamo adhyayah samaptas."

Here, Pujyapada Swami has mentioned only the name of his commentary 'Tattvarthvritti' along with its name, without mentioning the independent name of 'Tattvarthsutra'. This clearly shows that there is an independent text called 'Tattvarth' and this is a commentary written on it. It is very likely that the same situation was in front of the commentator Umaswati while writing the concluding flower verses of each chapter. This shows that:

1. See, Siddhasen Ganini commentary chapter one and six concluding flower verses.
2. See, Ratlam Seth Rishabhdevji Kesharimalji Jain Shwetamber Sanstha published 'Tattvarthbhahya' copy.

Page #32:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

They are referring to the "Tattvarthaadhigama Arhatpravachansangraha" commentary, which they consider an independent text on Tattvartha. It is clear that the name "Tattvarthaadhigama" belongs to the commentary by Uma Swami, not to the Tattvarthasutra itself.

Two versions of the sutra text are available: one accepted by the Digambara tradition and the other by the Svetambara tradition. We will discuss the original form of the sutra text before the composition of Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthabhashya in due course. The main purpose here is to provide a general introduction to these two sutra texts.

According to the Digambara tradition, the sutra numbers in the ten chapters are as follows: 33+53+39+42+42+27+39+26+47+9 = 357. According to the Svetambara tradition, the sutra numbers in the ten chapters are as follows: 35+52+18+53+44+26+34+26+49+7 = 344.

There are five main points in the first chapter where the two sutra texts differ fundamentally. The first point is the sutra that discusses the four types of matigyan. Here, the Digambara tradition accepts the "avay" reading, while the Svetambara tradition accepts the "apaya" reading. Prajnachchhu Pandit Sukhlalji, while discussing the Tattvarthasutra accepted by the Svetambara tradition, mainly accepts the "avay" reading. The second point is the sutra that discusses the 12 substances that are the objects of matigyan. Here, the Digambara tradition accepts the reading "anisritanukt-", while the Svetambara tradition accepts the reading "anishritasandhight-". The difference in meaning is clear due to the difference in reading. The third point is the sutra "dvividho'vadhi:". The Svetambara tradition considers this a sutra, while in Sarvarthasiddhi, it is part of the utthanika of the sutra "bhavapratyayavadhivanarakaanaam". The fourth point is the sutra that discusses the second type of avadhigyan. Here, the Digambara tradition accepts the reading "kshayopashamanimittah", while the Svetambara tradition accepts the reading "yathoktanimittah". The fifth point is the sutra that discusses the seven naya. Here, the Digambara tradition considers all seven naya as original and mentions them equally. However, the Svetambara tradition considers five naya as original and mentions the naigama and shabdnaya separately through two and three different sutras respectively. Generally, seven naya are considered original in both the Digambara and Svetambara traditions, and they are also mentioned as original naya in the Agamic literature. However, when considering which naya accepts which niksepa from the namadi niksepas, five naya, including naigama, are often mentioned. It is very likely that seeing this practice, Uma Swami may have considered five naya as original, and there is no surprise in that.

There are two main points in the second chapter. The first point is the sutra that discusses the parinaamik bhavas. After listing the three names of parinaamik bhavas, the Svetambara tradition accepts the adi pada, while the Digambara tradition does not. Here, while explaining the true nature of the jiva, the parinaamik bhavas are mentioned. The Digambara tradition does not mainly count other dravya and ordinary parinaamik bhavas here, while the Svetambara tradition does, and this is the purpose of giving the adi pada here. The second point is the sutra that discusses the types of sthavarakayik jivas. According to the Agamic practice, both traditions accept five types of sthavaras, and the Digambara tradition accepts five types here according to the same practice. However, the Svetambara tradition considers agnikayik and vayukayik jivas as gatitras and mentions them along with the trasas. This has led to differences in the composition of several sutras. The third point is the sutra "upayogah: sparshadish". The Svetambara tradition considers it an independent sutra, while the Digambara tradition does not consider it a sutra.

1. See, Dhavala book, 12th Vedana Pratyay Vidhan named Adhikar. See, Kashayaprabhut Pra. book, appendix page 71.

Page #33:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The Digambara and Svetambara traditions differ in their acceptance of certain sutras (aphorisms) within the Tattvartha Sutra. 

**Fourth Sutra:** The Digambara tradition accepts the sutra "Ekasamyaavigraha" as it is, while the Svetambara tradition considers it to be about "Ekasamya" (oneness) and uses the masculine singular form.

**Fifth Sutra:** The Digambara tradition accepts the term "Pot" while the Svetambara tradition accepts "Potja" in the sutra about birth.

**Sixth Sutra:** The Digambara tradition accepts the sutra "Taijasamipi" while the Svetambara tradition does not. The Svetambara tradition considers the discussion about the causes of the origin of all "Nimittaja" (caused) bodies to be part of the Tattvartha Bhashya (commentary) rather than a separate sutra.

**Seventh Sutra:** The Digambara tradition uses the phrase "Pramattasanyatasyaeva" while the Svetambara tradition uses "Chaturdashapurvadharasyava" in the sutra about the Aharak (food) body.

**Eighth Sutra:** The Digambara tradition considers the sutra "Seshaastrivedah" to be independent, while the Svetambara tradition rejects it based on the "Parisesha Nyaya" (principle of residue).

**Ninth Sutra:** The Digambara tradition uses the phrase "Charamottamadeha" while the Svetambara tradition uses "Charmadehotamapurusha" in the sutra about those who have not attained liberation.

**Third Chapter:**

* **First Sutra:** The Svetambara tradition adds the phrase "Prithutarah" after "Adho'dhah" in the first sutra.
* **Second Sutra:** The Svetambara tradition does not accept the term "Narakah" (hell) in the second sutra and considers it a separate sutra "Tasun Narakah". The Svetambara tradition considers the four sutras from the second onwards to be about the state of hell, while the Digambara tradition considers them to be about the state of all hell-like places.
* **Eleventh Sutra onwards:** The Digambara tradition accepts the 21 sutras after the eleventh sutra as separate sutras, while the Svetambara tradition does not.

**Fourth Chapter:**

* **Second Sutra:** The Digambara tradition accepts the sutra "Aditastrishu Pitantaleshya" while the Svetambara tradition accepts "Tritiyah Pitaleshyah". The Svetambara tradition considers the "Pitantaleshya" to be a type of astrologer, which led to the difference in interpretation and the Svetambara tradition accepting a separate sutra "Pilantaleshya" at the seventh position.
* **Sutra about Kalpas (epochs):** The Svetambara tradition accepts the phrase "Dvayordvayoh" in the sutra about the investigation of the remaining Kalpas, which leads them to consider the four Kalpas (Anata, etc.) as two.
* **Sutra about Kalpas:** The Digambara tradition mentions sixteen Kalpas while the Svetambara tradition mentions twelve.
* **Sutra about Laukantika Devas (worldly gods):** The Digambara tradition mentions eight types of Laukantika Devas while the Svetambara tradition mentions nine. However, the Tattvartha Bhashya mentions only eight types.
* **Sutra "Aupapaddhikamanushyebhyah" onwards:** There are significant differences in the sutra readings between the two traditions in this chapter. Many sutras accepted by the Svetambara tradition are not found in the Digambara tradition. Some sutras have different readings in the two traditions.

**Fifth Chapter:**

* **"Dravyani" and "Jivaasch" sutras:** The Digambara tradition considers these two sutras separately, while the Svetambara tradition considers them as one.
* **Sutra about the number of regions of Dharma, Adharma, and Anekant**: The Digambara tradition mentions the number of regions for Dharma, Adharma, and Anekant, while the Svetambara tradition does not.

Page #34:
---------------------------
The 24th chapter of the text discusses the concept of "Sarvarthasiddhi" (all-encompassing success) and its relation to the "Jiva" (soul). The Digambara tradition considers the "Jiva" as a separate entity, while the Svetambara tradition treats it as a part of the "Sarvarthasiddhi" concept.

The third point of discussion is the "Sadvyalaksanam" (characteristics of the true) sutra. The Svetambara tradition does not accept this sutra.

The fourth point concerns the transformation of "Pudgalas" (matter) after they are bound to the soul. The Svetambara tradition prefers the term "Sama" (equal) in this context.

Both Digambara and Svetambara traditions generally agree that "karma" (action) with a higher quality binds to the soul with a lower quality. However, the Svetambara tradition deviates from this principle in the interpretation and structure of the sutras.

The fifth point discusses the "Kala" (time) dravya (substance). The Svetambara tradition disagrees with the existence of "Kala" as a dravya, instead using the term "Addhasamaya" (half-time) and considering it as a "Paryaya" (state) dravya.

The sixth point deals with the "Parinam" (transformation) of the soul. The Digambara tradition accepts only the sutra "Tadbhavah Parinam" (transformation is the same as the cause), while the Svetambara tradition accepts three additional sutras.

The sixth chapter has ten points of difference. The first point is the second sutra, which the Digambara tradition considers as one sutra, while the Svetambara tradition considers it as two.

The second point is the sutra "Indriyakapayaavrata Kriyaah" (actions of the senses, organs, vows, and conduct). The Digambara tradition accepts this sutra as it is, while the Svetambara tradition prefers the text "Avratakashayeindriykriyaah" (actions of the senses, organs, non-vows, and passions).

The third point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" (influx) of the "Sataavedaniya" (hundred-fold suffering). The Digambara tradition accepts the text "Bhootvratyanukampa Daanasaragasanayamaadi Yogaah" (the practice of compassion, charity, non-attachment, and restraint), while the Svetambara tradition prefers "Bhootvratyanukampa Daanam Saragasanayamaadi Yogaah" (compassion, charity, attachment, and restraint).

The fourth point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Charitramoha" (attachment to conduct). The Svetambara tradition prefers the term "Atma" (soul) after the term "Teertha" (intense).

The fifth point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Narakaayu" (hellish life). The Svetambara tradition prefers the term "Cha" (and) in the middle of the sutra.

The sixth point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Manushyaayu" (human life). The Digambara tradition considers these as two sutras, while the Svetambara tradition considers them as one. Additionally, the Svetambara tradition prefers the text "Swabhavamardavarjanam" (abandonment of natural gentleness) instead of "Swabhavamardavam" (natural gentleness).

The seventh point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Devaayu" (divine life). The Digambara tradition considers the sutra "Samyaktva Cha" (right faith and) as a separate entity, while the Svetambara tradition hesitates to accept it as a sutra.

The eighth point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Shubha Nama" (auspicious name). The Digambara tradition prefers the term "Tat" (that).

The ninth point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Teerthankara Prakruti" (nature of the Tirthankara). The Svetambara tradition prefers the text "Sangha Sadhusamadhih" (concentration on the community of the righteous) instead of "Sadhusamadhih" (concentration on the righteous).

The tenth point is the sutra concerning the "Asrava" of "Uchchagotra" (high lineage). The Svetambara tradition prefers the text "Tadviparayo" (opposite of that) instead of "Tadviparayo" (opposite of that).

The seventh chapter has six points of difference. The first point is the five sutras concerning the five "Vratas" (vows) and their five "Bhavanaas" (feelings). The Digambara tradition accepts these as sutras, while the Svetambara tradition does not.

The second point is the sutra "Hisadishvihaamutra" (here and hereafter). The Svetambara tradition prefers the term "Cha" (and) after the term "Amutra" (hereafter).

The third point is the sutra "Maitri" (friendship) and others. The Digambara tradition prefers the term "Cha" (and) in the middle of the sutra.

The fourth point is the sutra "Jagatkaaya" (world body) and others. The Digambara tradition prefers the term "Va" (or), while the Svetambara tradition prefers "Cha" (and).

The fifth point is the sutra concerning the seven "Sheelas" (virtues). The Digambara tradition prefers the text "Proshadhopavas" (fasting on medicine), while the Svetambara tradition prefers "Praushadhopavas" (fasting on medicine).

The sixth point is the sutra concerning the five "Atichaaras" (excesses) of the "Ahimsa" (non-violence) vow. The Svetambara tradition prefers the text "Savicched" (with separation) instead of "Chhed" (separation).

The eighth chapter has six points of difference. The first point is the second sutra. The Svetambara tradition considers it as two sutras.

The second point is the sutra concerning the five "Bhedas" (divisions) of "Jnanavarana" (veil of knowledge). The Digambara tradition...

Page #35:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This text discusses differences in the texts of the Digambara and Svetambara traditions of Jainism. It focuses on the differences in the names of the five types of knowledge, the five types of sleep, the five types of distractions, the six types of virtues and vices, the ten types of Dharma, the five types of conduct, and the three types of meditation.

The text also mentions that there are many other minor differences in the texts of the two traditions, but these are not discussed in detail.

## Differences in Textual Interpretations

The text highlights that the differences in the texts of the two traditions are based on the interpretations of the *Satartha Siddhi* and *Tattvartha Bhashya*. The *Satartha Siddhi* is a commentary on the *Tattvartha Sutra*, a foundational text in Jainism. The *Tattvartha Bhashya* is another commentary on the *Tattvartha Sutra*.

The text notes that the Digambara commentators generally follow the interpretation of the *Satartha Siddhi*, while the Svetambara commentators follow the interpretation of the *Tattvartha Bhashya*. However, there are significant differences in the interpretations of the *Tattvartha Bhashya* itself, as evidenced by the commentaries of Haribhadra Suri and Siddhasena Divakara.

The text uses the example of the *Nityavasthanitanyaruparani* sutra from the fifth chapter of the *Tattvartha Sutra* to illustrate the differences in interpretations. Siddhasena Divakara, in his commentary on this sutra, mentions several different interpretations.

This text provides a glimpse into the complex history of textual interpretation in Jainism and the differences that exist between the Digambara and Svetambara traditions.

Page #36:
---------------------------
##  **Sarvarthasiddhi**

1. According to one commentator, 'Nityavasthanianyrupaani' is not one sutra but two. The first is 'Nityavasthanitani' and the second is 'Arupaani'. 'Arupaani' is considered a separate sutra to prove that the four substances, Dharma etc., are formless.
2. According to another commentator, 'Nityavaspitarupaani' is the sutra. According to this, there is no need to give a separate case ending at the end of the word 'Nityavasthanit-'. All three words should be compounded.
3. The third opinion is that the sutra is 'Nityavasthanianyrupaani'. But in this, the word 'nitya' is not independent but an adjective of the word 'avasthita'. According to this opinion, the first word will be 'nityam avasthanitani nityavasthanitani'.
1. Apart from these, two other opinions have been mentioned there. But they are only differences of opinion regarding the meaning, so we have not discussed them separately here.
_ Later on, these differences of opinion increased even further. As evidence, we present here some of the textual variations of the Tattvarthasutra commentary, which were introduced by Shriman Pandit Jugul Kishorji Mukhtar in Anekanta Varsh Tri Kiran Ek. This commentary was sent to Panditji by Shriman Pandit Nathuramji Premi.
By examining this commentary, it is clear that it is the work of a Svetambara Acharya, because it addresses the Digambara Acharyas with words like 'jad', 'duratma' and 'sutravachanachour'. Therefore, the textual variations or additional sutras found in this commentary are quite significant. The additional sutras found in the commentary are:
Taijasam api 50, Dharma vansa shaillanjani arista madhavya madhaviti cha 2, Uchavasaaharvedanoppaatanubhavatasch sadhya: 23, Sa dvividhah 42, Samyaktvam cha 21, Dharmaastikaayaabhavat.
The Tattvarthabhashyakar does not accept these as sutras. Similarly, the main commentators of the Tattvarthabhashya, Haribhadrasuri and Siddhasenagani, also do not consider these as sutras. Nevertheless, the commentator has considered them as sutras. Even if we forget for a while the debate about whether they are sutras or not, the sutra 'Samyaktvam cha' found among them cannot be forgotten under any circumstances. It is not mentioned in the Tattvarthabhashya, nor have other Svetambara Acharyas mentioned it. Yet, the commentator considers it a sutra based on some old source. Not only that, he considers it to be the work of the original sutrakar.
This was the discussion about the differences in the sutras. Now look at one of its textual variations. According to the Digambara tradition, the sutra that describes the seven kshetras in the third chapter does not have the word 'tatra' at the beginning, but the Tattvarthabhashya-accepted version of the said sutra has the word 'tatra' at the beginning. Nevertheless, the commentator here does not accept the Tattvarthabhashya-accepted text but accepts the Digambara tradition-accepted text.
The point to be noted here is that when the Tattvarthasutra and the Tattvarthabhashya were the work of the same person and the Svetambara Acharyas were well aware of this fact, why was there so much difference of opinion regarding the text of the sutras, especially when the Tattvarthabhashya confirms the text accepted by it? We conclude, seeing all this difference of opinion, that before the Tattvarthabhashya-accepted text of the sutras was accepted, there were many attempts, big and small, to establish the Svetambara tradition-accepted text of the sutras, and those attempts continued to be accepted even later. This is why, even after Uma Swami wrote the Tattvarthabhashya and established the text of the sutras, it did not receive the same acceptance that the Sarvarthasiddhi and the text of the sutras accepted by it received in the Digambara tradition.
2. Sarvarthasiddhi 1. The significance of the name - In the available literature, Sarvarthasiddhi is the first commentary written on the Tattvarthasutra.

Page #37:
---------------------------
## Introduction
27
At the end of each chapter, Acharya Pujyapada himself has given a concluding verse. In it, he has mentioned its name as Sarvarthasiddhi and accepted it as a commentary. In praise of it, he writes at the end of the commentary...

"Those who desire the happiness of heaven and liberation, let them constantly hold in their minds this Tattvartha-vritti, known as Sarvarthasiddhi, which is the essence of the excellent nectar of the Jainendra Shastra, and which has been established by virtuous men."

He further writes:

"Those who know the essence of the truth, who listen to this Tattvartha-vritti with devotion to Dharma, and who read it, have as if taken the nectar of the supreme happiness of Siddhi in their hands. What is there to be said about the happiness of the Chakravartis and the Indras?"

The purpose of giving it the name 'Sarvarthasiddhi' is that by contemplating it, one attains the fulfillment of all kinds of meanings, or the fulfillment of the supreme happiness of liberation, which is the best of all meanings. This statement is not an exaggeration, because the doctrine of the Tattvartha-sutra, which is explained in it, is the means of achieving the liberation, which is the primary goal of all human endeavors.

The Indian tradition has given birth to many philosophies. But at the root of all of them, the attainment of the goal of liberation has been the primary objective. Maharshi Jaimini begins the Purva Mimamsa Darshan with the sutra:

"Om, Athato Dharma-jijnasa ||1||"

And after that, he describes the nature of Dharma and considers its means. The same is the case with Vyasa Maharshi. He began the Sharirika Mimamsa Darshan with the sutra:

"Athato Brahma-jijnasa ||1||"

Now look at the sutras of the Nyaya Darshan. Its founder, Gautama Maharshi, writes that the knowledge of the true nature of Pramana, Prameya, Sanshaya, Prayojana, Drishtaanta, Siddhanta, Avayava, Tarka, Nirnaya, Vada, Jalapa, Vitanda, Hetvabhasa, Chala, Jati, and Nigraha-sthana leads to the attainment of liberation. ||1|| The sutra is as follows:

"Pramana-prameya-sanshaya-prayojana-drishtaanta-siddhanta-avayava-tarka-nirnaya-vada-jalpa-vitanda-hetuabhasa-chala-jati-nigraha-sthanaanaam tattva-jnaanaat nishreyasa-adhigaman ||1||"

The founder of the Vaisheshika Darshan, Maharshi Kanada, also has this vision in front of him. He writes at the beginning:

"Athato Dharma-vyakhyasyam ||1||"

The situation of Kapila Rishi is not much different. He also considered the ultimate goal of human endeavor as the main one. He begins the Sankhya Darshan with these words:

"Ath trividha-khaatyanta-nivattri-atyant-purushartha ||1||"

The beginning of the Yoga Darshan is even more captivating. Maharshi Patanjali says: "Now we will teach Yoga. ||1|| Yoga is the cessation of the fluctuations of the mind. ||2|| When the fluctuations of the mind cease, the seer abides in his own nature. ||3||" Look at his sutras on this subject:

"Ab yoganushasanam ||1|| Yogashchittavrittinirudhah ||2|| Tava drashta svrupe'vasthanam ||3||"

After all this, when our gaze falls on the Tattvartha-sutra, the sutra text of Jain Darshan, we see the same truth there. Beginning it, Acharya Gadadhar writes:

"1. Iti Sarvarthasiddhi-sanjnakayaam Tattvartha-vattau prathama-adhyaayah samaaptah."

Page #38:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi
'Samyagdarshanaman Charitranni Mokshamārgaḥ ||1||'
This is the essence of the formulation of Indian philosophies. Therefore, it is entirely appropriate for Pujyapada Swami to say that those who read and listen to this tattvārthavṛtti with devotion to Dharma, as if they have taken the nectar of supreme bliss in their own hands. Then what to say about the pleasures of the Chakravarti and Indra? This makes its name 'Sarvarthasiddhi' meaningful.
28
2. Style of Composition - We have said that Sarvarthasiddhi is a vṛtti-grantha. The vṛttikāra has also called it 'vṛtti'. In which, taking the support of the words of the sūtra, the discussion of each word is done along with the word incident. This is called vṛtti. This meaning of vṛtti is literally fulfilled in Sarvarthasiddhi. There is hardly any word of the sūtra which is not explained in it. For example, in the first chapter of the Tattvarthasutra, sūtra 2, why the word 'tattvārtha' is used instead of just 'tattva' or 'artha', he has discussed it with such clarity, pointing to other philosophies, that it gives a clear glimpse of the vṛttikāra's style of composition. He proceeds by considering every word of the sūtra in detail. Where there appears to be a contradiction with the āgama, he protects the sūtra text as it is, and skillfully reconciles it. This skill of his is even more evident in chapter 4, sūtra 19 and sūtra 22. In sūtra 19, instead of saying 'navagraiveyakeṣu', it is said 'navasu graṁ veyakeṣu'. It is not hidden from every āgamāmāsi that there are nine vimāna called anudiśa besides the nine graiveyak. But the original sūtra does not mention the nine anudiśa. Acharya Pujyapada does not hide this secret. He understands the intention of the sūtrakara and explains the reason for not keeping the word 'nava' intact, clearly stating that here the word 'nava' has been directed separately to take the nine anudiśa. The same problem arises before him during the explanation of the 22nd sūtra. Up to the second kalpa of the āgama, up to the twelfth kalpa of the pītaleśyā, up to the padmaleśyā, and further on, the śuklaleśyā is directed. According to this arrangement of the āgama, it is very difficult to reconcile the said sūtra. But the courage with which he protects both the āgama and the sūtra text on such an occasion, seeing this, our head cannot remain bowed at his feet without reverence.
Patanjali's Mahābhāṣya is famous on Panini's grammar. In it, the discussion of a subject as dry and difficult as grammar has been done in such a pleasant and simple way that one does not want to leave it after taking it in hand. We will see later how much the Sarvarthasiddhikāra used it while writing Sarvarthasiddhi. Here it is only to be told that not only was it used extensively in it, but it was also digested well and constructed in the same style, and surprisingly, it is a grammar text and this is a philosophy text, yet there is no slackness in the composition anywhere. The style of composition of Sarvarthasiddhi can be compared to the flowing current of a flat river, which always moves forward in one form with a steady and peaceful feeling, it does not know how to stop anywhere.
Acharya Pujyapada has not only paid attention to the beauty of language in it, but has also fully fulfilled the āgamika tradition. The seventh and eighth sūtras of the first chapter are a prime example of this. While discussing the explanation of these sūtras, it becomes clear how deeply he had studied the siddhānta granthas. From this, we dare to say with certainty that by writing Sarvarthasiddhi, on the one hand he has increased the glory of Sanskrit literature, on the other hand he has also earned the credit of protecting the āgamika literature that has come down from tradition.
In conclusion, regarding the style of composition of Sarvarthasiddhi, it can be said briefly that it is written in such a pleasant and subject-oriented style that later readers, from Upāsyāti onwards, all the commentators, vārtikakāras and tīkakāras of the Tattvarthasutra, have been compelled to follow it.

Page #39:
---------------------------
## Introduction

3. Textual variations and interpretations - While writing the Sarvarthasiddhi, Acharya Pujyapada did not mention any other commentary or text on the Tattvarthasutra. However, it can be said from the Sarvarthasiddhi that he must have had one or two small sutra texts or commentaries in front of him while writing it, and there were also one or two important textual variations in them. Acharya Pujyapada has discussed such textual variations in two places. The first place is the 16th sutra of the first chapter and the second place is the 53rd sutra of the second chapter.

1. The 16th sutra of the first chapter is as follows:

> Bahubahuvividhani Tanuktan Vaṇān
> Tarāṇām || 16 ||

In this, the text is "Anihsut" after "Kshipre", but Acharya Pujyapada points out that "Apareshām Kshinishrit iti pāṭhaḥ." That is, according to other Acharyas, the text is "Nishrit" in place of "Anihsut" after "Kshike".

29

Currently, none of the commentaries and sutra texts of the Tattvarthasutra available to us, whether Digambara or Svetambara, have this second text. Therefore, it cannot be said that Acharya Pujyapada mentioned this difference of opinion based on any one commentary or sutra text. The commentator of the Tattvarthabhasya, Vacaka Umasvati, has definitely not accepted the word "Anihsut" in the Sarvarthasiddhi, and instead accepted the text "Anishrit". Therefore, there is no doubt that Acharya Pujyapada had the Tattvarthabhasya or the Tattvarthabhasya-approved sutra text in front of him, and he pointed to it through this textual variation. It seems likely that among the commentaries and annotations that were available to him while writing the Sarvarthasiddhi commentary, some of them may have had this second text, and Acharya Pujyapada mentioned this textual variation from that source. Not only that, but it would also have been reconciled in some commentary. This is why Acharya Pujyapada did not just mention the textual variation, but also mentioned how other Acharyas interpret this text if it is accepted, using the phrase "Te evam varṇayanti" etc.

2. The 53rd sutra of the second chapter is as follows:

> "Aupapādikacaramosmāyeha sāṁkhyeya varṣāyuṣo'naptyuḥ || 53 ||"

This has the text "Charamolamadeha". This creates the confusion of whether all Charmasariri are those with the best body, or if some are, then what is the need to give the word "Uttama"? And if some are those with the best body, then should it be considered that only those Charmasariri who have the best body have infinite lifespan, and not other Charmasariri? It is very likely that someone may have accepted the text "Charmadeha" to avoid this flaw. Whatever it may be, both texts were in front of Acharya Pujyapada, and he accepted the text "Charamotamadeha" as the sutrakar's, and mentioned the text "Charmadeha" as a textual variation.

The sutra text approved by the Tattvarthabhasya that is available today has the text "Charamveholam puruṣa". Some scholars doubt that Acharya Pujyapada may have had the Tattvarthabhasya in front of him, and based on that, he mentioned this textual variation in the Sarvarthasiddhi. However, we do not see any factual basis in their statement. Because, firstly, the Tattvarthabhasya does not have the text "Charmadeha". It definitely has the text "Charamvehotam puruṣa", but the situation regarding this text is also unclear. Acharya Siddhasena has raised this issue in his commentary on the Tattvarthabhasya, and finally said that we cannot say what the actual situation is in this regard.

Page #40:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

If another Acharya, like Pujyapada, had encountered the reading "charamveha" in the Tattvarthabhaṣya, they would have mentioned "charamdehottampurusa iti va pāṭhaḥ" instead of "charamveha iti va pāṭhaḥ." This is because they had to decide which reading, "charamdehottampurusa" or another, was available in place of "charamdeha." In such a situation, they would not mention an incomplete alternative reading, even by mistake.

It is clear that this alternative reading, like "kṣipranisaṭ," must have been available to Acharya Pujyapada in other commentary texts. It is on this basis that he mentions it here.

3. We have already given an example of arthantrannyasa in the context of the style of composition, while discussing Chapter 4, Sutra 22. There, we have indicated that Acharya Pujyapada has beautifully maintained both the sutra and the agam, as the complete agamic meaning did not fit in the sutra. This is the first example of arthantrannyasa.

4. As a second example, we present the 11th sutra of the 9th chapter. It mentions the 11 parisahas of vedaniya nimittaka. To clarify this topic further, we would like to discuss it in detail.

The parisahas are considered from the sixth gunasthana, as the beginning of the sramanyapada occurs here. Therefore, it is correct to say that all parisahas exist in this gunasthana, because there is a presence of pramada in this gunasthana. In the presence of pramada, both the actions of generating the kṣudhādijanaya vikalpa and the effort to divert the cittavṛtti from it towards dharmyadhyana to overcome it become necessary. And the situation of the seventh gunasthana, although free from pramada, is not different from this, because the difference between these two gunasthanas is only in the presence or absence of pramada. Although the sixth gunasthana is named after the vikalpa and its corresponding pravṛtti, and the seventh gunasthana is named after its suppression, the flow of these two gunasthanas is so much up and down that the parisahas and their actions like jaya cannot be properly divided, and these actions have to be considered as belonging to both. The udirana of vedaniya occurs up to the sixth gunasthana, not beyond. Therefore, it can be said that the kṣudhādijanaya vedanakarya that occurs in the sixth gunasthana due to the nimitta of vedaniya is not possible in any way beyond that. Upon reflection, this seems to be the case, and it is indeed so, because in the gunasthanas of apramattasamyata etc., the jiva has neither external pravṛtti nor results in accordance with external pravṛtti. Also, the kṣayās arise in an unmanifest form, without buddhi, then how far is it appropriate to consider the presence of kṣudhādi parisahas? This is a matter for consideration. Therefore, it is necessary to see here from what perspective the presence of these parisahas is considered in the later gunasthanas.

Any object is considered from two perspectives: one from the perspective of its function, and the other...

1. Although the commentator Umasvati has explained each term of the "aupapatika" sutra, and has independently explained the term "uttampurusa," and later, in the conclusion, he has declared all except the term "uttampurusa" as having an "anpavartya āyu," it can be concluded from this that the term "charamdeha" alone, similar to the term "charamdehottampurusa," was also acceptable to him. But here, it is necessary to see on what basis the commentator Umasvati, being the sutrakar himself, has accepted these two readings in the bhasya. When he was certain that uttampurusa also have anpavartya āyu, then while concluding, he should have included them along with the others. But he did not do so. This clearly shows that the commentator Umasvati must have also encountered two readings, and he must have considered it appropriate to explain both in sequence. On this basis, he cannot be the sutrakar in any way.

Page #41:
---------------------------
## From a causal perspective:

**31**

The scriptures have extensively discussed the nature and causes of the *parivāha* and their *jaya*. The meaning of *parivāha* and their *jaya* is to restrain one's mind from going towards them when they arise due to obstacles and to remain engaged in essential activities like self-study, meditation, etc. Considering this nature of *parivāha* and their *jaya*, it becomes clear that the *pramatta-samyata* *guṇasthāna* is the only one where the mind goes towards them when they arise due to obstacles, and the being strives to restrain the mind from these *parivāha*. However, the situation in the higher *guṇasthānas* is different. There, even in the presence of external causes, the mind does not even slightly enter them. Not only that, but further on, a situation arises where neither external causes are present nor the mind remains. Therefore, in these *guṇasthānas*, the *parivāha* are only instructed by considering the internal causes.

Causes are also of two types: external causes and internal causes. There is no rule for the presence of external causes. Some may be attainable, and some may not. But internal causes are found in everyone. This is why the texts of both the Digambara and Svetambara traditions, when considering the causes of *parivāha*, primarily point to internal causes. This is why in the *Tattvārthasūtra*, these internal causes are described as the *udaya* of *jñānāvaraṇa*, *vedanīya*, *darśana-mohaniya*, *cāritra-mohaniya*, and *antarāya*, not in any other form.

There are twenty-two *parivāha* in total. Among them, *prajñā* and *ajñāna* *parivāha* occur in the *udaya* of *jñānāvaraṇa*. The *udaya* of *jñānāvaraṇa* occurs up to the *kṣīṇa-moha* *guṇasthāna*, therefore, their *sadbhāva* is said to be up to the *kṣīṇa-moha* *guṇasthāna*. However, this does not mean that the *vikalpa* that can occur in a *pramatta-samyata* being due to *prajñā* and *ajñāna* also occurs in the *aprammatta-samyata* and other *guṇasthānas*. Even though such *vikalpa* does not occur in the higher *guṇasthānas*, the *udaya* of *jñānāvaraṇa* is found there, therefore, their *sadbhāva* is said to be there.

*Adarśana-parivāha* occurs in the *udaya* of *darśana-mohaniya*, and *alābha-parivāha* occurs in the *udaya* of *antarāya*. It is not hidden from any student of karma-śāstra that the *udaya* of *darśana-mohaniya* occurs only up to the *aprammatta-samyata* *guṇasthāna*, therefore, the *sadbhāva* of *adarśana-parivāha* can be said to be up to this *guṇasthāna* at most. And the *udaya* of *antarāya* occurs up to the *kṣīṇa-moha* *guṇasthāna*, therefore, the *sadbhāva* of *alābha-parivāha* is said to be up to there. But in terms of function, both these *parivāha* should be known to be up to the *pramatta-samyata* *guṇasthāna* only. Their *sadbhāva* further on is said only in relation to the *udaya* of *darśana-mohaniya* and the *udaya* of *antarāya*.

**Introduction**

It is also desirable to consider here, in passing, what the *Tattvārthasūtra* author, Ācārya Gṛddhpiṭṭha, meant by the term *bādarasāmprāya* when he states the *sadbhāva* of all *parivāha* in a *bādarasāmprāya* being. We have already written that the *udaya* of *darśana-mohaniya* occurs only up to the *aprammatta-samyata* *guṇasthāna*, therefore, the *sadbhāva* of *adarśana-parivāha* cannot be considered to be beyond the *aprammatta-samyata* *guṇasthāna* in any way. In such a situation, the meaning of *bādarasāmprāya* can only be a being with gross *kaṣāya*. This is why, in *Sarvārthasiddhi*, while explaining this term, it is said that "This is not the acceptance of a particular *guṇasthāna*. Then what is it? It is a meaningful instruction. It accepts *pramatta* etc. *samyata*."

But in the *Tattvārthabhāṣya*, the sūtra "Mādarasāmprāye sabai" is explained in these words: "Bāvarasāmyarāyasaṃyate sarve dvāviṃśatir api parīṣhaḥ saṃbhavanti." That is, all twenty-two *parivāha* are possible in a *bādarasāmprāya* *samyata*. The main commentator of the *Tattvārthabhāṣya* is Siddhasena Gaṇi. He explains the above words of the *Tattvārthabhāṣya* in these words:

1. Nevaṃ guṇasthāna viśeṣa grahaṇam. Kiṃ tarhi? Arthanirdeśaḥ tena pramattādīnāṃ saṃyatādīnāṃ grahaṇam. Saṃ. [A. 9, Sū. 12

Page #42:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

"The one whose kṣaya is sthūla is called bādarasāmprāya-samyata. Among them, some subdue the mohaniya, hence they are called upasamaka, and some destroy it, hence they are called kṣapaka. In this, all twenty-two kṣudhā etc. pariṣahas are possible."

This explanation clearly shows that the commentator Umāsvāti, following the intention of Siddhasena Gaṇika, here uses the term 'bādarasāmprāya' to refer to the ninth guṇasthāna. Prajñācaksu Paṇḍit Sukhlālji has also accepted this meaning in his commentary on the Tattvārthasūtra. He writes, "Where the bādar, i.e., special form of sāmprāya-kṣaya, is possible, that is the ninth guṇasthāna called sāmprāya. There are twenty-two pariṣahas in this ninth guṇasthāna. This is because all the karmas that are the cause of pariṣahas are present there."

These are two interpretations of the term 'bādarasāmprāya', found in Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvārthabhāṣya respectively. According to the interpretation of Sarvarthasiddhi, the term 'bādarasāmprāya' is not indicative of a specific guṇasthāna, but rather a semantic reference, which makes sense in the context of the emergence of adarśana pariṣaha in the emergence of darśanamohaniya. However, accepting the interpretation of Tattvārthabhāṣya creates a new obstacle. The existence of darśanamohaniya persists until the upasāntamoha guṇasthāna, so it can be said that they might have referred to the adarśana pariṣaha until the ninth guṇasthāna called bādarasāmprāya, in relation to the existence of darśanamohaniya. But accepting this view raises two new objections. Firstly, if they have accepted the existence of adarśana pariṣaha in relation to the existence of darśanamohaniya, then its existence should be stated until the eleventh guṇasthāna. Secondly, while explaining the sūtra "kṣutpipāsā-śītoṣṇa", he says, "These pariṣahas arise from the emergence of all five karma-prakṛtis." This means that these pariṣahas are produced by the emergence of five karma-prakṛtis. Accepting the aforementioned meaning does not seem to be consistent with this statement. Because, on the one hand, accepting the existence of adarśana pariṣaha until the ninth guṇasthāna in relation to the existence of darśanamohaniya, and on the other hand, stating that all pariṣahas are the result of the emergence of five karmas, these two contradictory statements are questionable. It is clear that according to the commentary of Siddhasena Gaṇika, the statement of Tattvārthabhāṣya is not only erroneous, but also contrary to the intention of the original sūtrakāra, because the original sūtrakāra has accepted the existence of these pariṣahas primarily due to the emergence of karmas. Otherwise, he would have definitely mentioned the existence of adarśana pariṣaha and the existence of nāranya etc. pariṣahas due to the cause of cāritramoha, until the eleventh guṇasthāna called upasāntamoha.

Nāgnya, arati, strī, niṣadyā, ākrośa, yācanā, and satkāra-puraskāra, these seven pariṣahas occur in the emergence of cāritramohaniya. Generally, although the emergence of cāritramohaniya occurs until the tenth guṇasthāna called sūkṣma sāmprāyika, it can be doubted that the existence of these seven pariṣahas should be stated until the tenth guṇasthāna. However, there are two reasons for not stating their existence until the tenth guṇasthāna. Firstly, the emergence of the sub-categories of cāritramohaniya, namely krodha, māna, and māyā, and the kṣayās of ni and nokṣaya, occurs only until a certain part of the ninth guṇasthāna, hence the existence of these pariṣahas is stated until the ninth guṇasthāna. Secondly, although the emergence of cāritramohaniya occurs in the tenth guṇasthāna, only the emergence of one kṣaya, namely lobha, occurs, and that too is very subtle, hence their existence is stated only until the ninth guṇasthāna, not until the tenth guṇasthāna.

And kṣudhā, pipāsā, śīta, uṣṇa, daṃśamaśaka, caryā, śayyā, vadha, roga, taṇasparśa, and mala, these eleven...

Page #43:
---------------------------
**Introduction**

33 Pariṣahs arise from Vedaniya Karma. Since Vedaniya Karma arises in those who have it, therefore, their harmony is said to be up to that point.

Thus, in the Gunasthānas of Apramatta-samyata, etc., the Sūtra-kāra has spoken of the harmony of Pariṣahs, keeping in mind the cause. And for this reason, Ācārya Pūjyapāda, in the Sarvārthasiddhi-kāra, has first explained this Sūtra from the viewpoint of the Sūtra-kāra. Later, when he saw that some other scholars, like ordinary humans, were misinterpreting the mention of Pariṣahs, which are caused by the Kevali, and were only presenting the obstacles of hunger, thirst, etc., he used the word "na samshi" to explain that there are not eleven Pariṣahs in the form of the Kevali's actions. He has derived a different meaning from that Sūtra. In this, there is neither his sectarian view nor has he twisted the meaning. The sectarian view is of those who see it from that perspective. There have been and are differences of opinion among the Ācāryas, but it is a matter of understanding and experiencing how far it is appropriate to put the garland of sectarian view on all differences of opinion. If Ācārya Pūjyapāda had been of a sectarian viewpoint, he could have made a complete change in the Sūtra instead of making such an effort. But he has kept his position absolutely clear. If we look at it from the point of view of the truth, this is the only example that can be the touchstone of his literary authenticity. This is the second example of Artha-antaranyāsa. Apart from this, one or two more examples of Artha-antaranyāsa can be presented, but since there is no special purpose, we have not mentioned them here.

Thus, from these four examples, it is easily understood how much Ācārya Pūjyapāda has taken care of the protection of the original Sūtra-pāṭha and the variant readings.

**4. Sarvārthasiddhi and Tattvārtha-bhāṣya**

Even so, Ācārya Pūjyapāda is accused of having improved and expanded the available Sūtra-pāṭha and created the Sarvārthasiddhi. We will see later what period the Sarvārthasiddhi belongs to and what period the Tattvārtha-bhāṣya belongs to. There, we will only have to consider the inner nature of these two from a comparative perspective.

**1. Sūtra-pāṭha**

First, we take the Sūtra-pāṭha. There are enough minor differences in the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Sarvārthasiddhi and the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Tattvārtha-bhāṣya, due to changes in words or additions and deletions of Sūtras, but we do not have to speculate about all of them here. There are three Sūtras in which there is a fundamental difference. First, the Sūtra that states the number of heavens, second, the Sūtra that states the investigation in Sanatkumāra, etc., and third, the Sūtra that states that time is not an independent substance.

The fundamental difference in the Sūtra that states the heavens is that the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Sarvārthasiddhi enumerates 16 Kalpas, while the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Tattvārtha-bhāṣya enumerates 12 Kalpas. The objection to this is that when the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Sarvārthasiddhi mentions twelve distinctions of Kalpa-upanna Devas and sixteen are enumerated while counting the names, then it becomes a sufficient basis to believe that either Ācārya Pūjyapāda or some other Ācārya before him has added or subtracted from this Sūtra and given it its present form, while the situation of the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Tattvārtha-bhāṣya is completely different from this. Therefore, it is very likely that the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Tattvārtha-bhāṣya is the original and that the Sūtra-pāṭha accepted by the Sarvārthasiddhi was created later by improving it."

**1. See P. Sukhlalji's Introduction to Tattvārtha-sūtra, pp. 84, 85 2. See the two Sūtra-pāṭha sections, Appendix and its commentary 3. See A. 3 S. 2 1 4. For these objections, see P. Sukhlalji's Introduction to Tattvārtha-sūtra, pp. 73-89**

Page #44:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

Here, first of all, we need to consider whether it can be concluded from the said sutra that the sutra text accepted by the Tattvarthabhasya is the original and the sutra text accepted by the Sarvarthasiddhi was created by improving or expanding it. It is clear that there has been a change in one of the texts, but it is worth considering which text the change is possible in. As we see, according to the Digambara tradition, the types of Kalpopapann Dev are always counted as twelve and the Kalpas as sixteen. Kalpa is a special name for the dwelling place of Kalpopapann Dev. If there are twelve types of Kalpopapann Dev, but their dwelling places are considered to be sixteen types, then what is the problem in this? And on this basis, how can it be said that the sutra text accepted by the Sarvarthasiddhi has been improved? If it was desirable to improve it, then in chapter 4, sutra 3, 'twelve' could have been replaced with 'sixteen'. On the contrary, it can only be said that Pujyapada Swami protected the text he received as it was. On the other hand, when we pay attention to the text accepted by the Tattvarthabhasya, even then it does not seem possible to reach any conclusion based on this sutra. Because there also, in this sutra, there is no such strong reason for reduction or increase that it can be said that the said sutra has been changed. The acharyas of both traditions are firm in their own tradition's beliefs, so on this basis, it can only be said that it is possible to improve the sutras by the one who composed them in later times. Secondly, there is a sutra that advocates consideration in Sanatkumar etc. The position of this sutra in both is as follows:

* **Sarva** : Seshaah Sparsarupashabdamanahpraveechaaraah.
* **Tattvabhasya** : Seshaah Sparsarupashabdamanahpraveechaaraah dwayordwayoh.

We see that according to the Tattvarthabhasya, this sutra has the extra word 'dwayordwayoh', while it is completely absent in the Sarvarthasiddhi. Before this, in both traditions, the sutra 'Kayapraveechaaraah Aa Aishanaat' comes. This establishes the provision of praveechaar till the Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas. Further, according to the Sarvarthasiddhi, fourteen and according to the Tattvarthabhasya, ten Kalpas remain, in which this sutra establishes the provision of praveechaar. In the present case, it is to be seen how the consistency of this is established in both the Sarvarthasiddhi and the Tattvarthabhasya. It is clear that in the Sarvarthasiddhi, due to the absence of the word 'dwayordwayoh', Acharya Pujyapada did not face any difficulty in explaining it. He explained it according to the Aarsh and got rid of it. But the situation of the Tattvarthabhasyakar is completely different. Due to the word 'dwayordwayoh' in front of him, while explaining it, there was a problem that how to establish the consistency of this, as there are four subjects of praveechaar and ten Kalpas. As a result, he was forced to consider the last four Kalpas as two to explain this sutra. He tried to explain it somehow, but the inconsistency that arises from this cannot be removed in any way. This shows that he himself, relying on the Tattvarthabhasya, with the intention of clarifying this sutra, added this word to the sutra. Here, the possibility of the latter alternative is more.

We have found one or two more places where the consistency of the sutras has been established relying on the Tattvarthabhasya. For example, take the word 'Yathoktanimittaah'. This comes in the 22nd sutra of the first chapter. Before this, they have said the sutra 'Dvividho'vadhih' with the difference of one sutra, and they have explained these differences through this sutra. In the present case, the word 'Yathokt' in the word 'Yathoktanimittaah' refers to this bhasya. They want to say through this word that the remaining beings have six types of avadhi knowledge due to the nimitta which we have referred to in the bhasya of the sutra 'Dvividho'vadhih'. But in that situation, when the sutra composition has already been done and the bhasya has been written later, the situation of the bhasyakar becomes doubtful. And it has to be accepted that the Tattvarthabhasyakar, Vaachik Umaswati, has tried to improve the ancient sutra text.

The third is the sutra that accepts the existence of time. This is in both the Sarvarthasiddhi and the Tattvarthabhasya.

Page #45:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Type Mentioned**

**Introduction**

**Time**

**Kalach. Sarva. **
**Kal Ivetyeke. T. Bha. **

This acknowledges time as a substance. But the Tattvarthabhashyakar, while accepting time as a substance, does so based on the opinions of other Acharyas, not his own. This is why he has mentioned only five Astikayas wherever he has mentioned substances in the Tattvarthamadhyama, and has described the world as being made up of five Astikayas. The Shvetambar Agam literature mentions six substances, and in one place, the Tattvarthabhashyakar also mentions six substances, but this does not mean that he considers time as a form. The reason is that wherever the Shvetambar Agam literature mentions six substances, the word 'Addhasamay' is used for time substance, not the word 'Kal', and the meaning of the word 'Addhasamay' here is taken as a synonym, not a spatial substance. The Tattvarthabhashyakar has also followed this practice. In the Tattvarth Sutra, where the word 'Kal' appears, he has used the word 'Kal' while explaining it, but in the Sutras where the word 'Kal' does not appear, and where he considered it necessary to mention 'Kal', he has used the word 'Addhasamay' instead of 'Kal'.

These two situations of the Tattvarthabhashya and the accepted Sutra text help us to conclude that initially, a Sutra like 'Kalich' would have been created, but later it would have changed to 'Kamaschetyeke'.

**2. Style**

Here, two words need to be said about the style of Sutra creation in context. Looking at the Sarvarth Siddhi accepted Sutra text, it can be said that nothing is said in it by the principle of 'Pariseshannyaya'. It simply moves forward by explaining the Sutras and their terms. On the other hand, when we look at the Tattvarthabhashya, we do not see a definite style. Sometimes they accept 'Pariseshannyaya' and sometimes they don't. For example, the two Sutras 'Seshanam Samurchhanam' and 'Ashubhah Papasya' should not have been said by the principle of 'Pariseshannyaya', yet he has considered them as independent Sutras and left out 'Seshastrivedah' and 'Atonyatpaapam'. In such a situation, it does not seem reasonable to say that Acharya Pujyapada gave these the form of independent Sutras after seeing the Tattvarthabhashya. In fact, the Tattvarthabhashyakar has not been able to put himself in such a position that a definite line can be drawn about him. Take the example of the body section of another chapter. In it, both types of the origin of the Vaikriyika body are shown in the Sutras, but when the topic of the Tejas body came, he did not consider it necessary to show the type of its origin in the Sutra. Can it be said, looking at this section, that this inconsistency would have been pleasing to the original Sutrakar? Such inconsistencies are also seen in other Sutras of the Tattvarthabhashya. In the fourth chapter, the Sutra that describes the Laukantik Devas comes, while describing the differences of the Laukantik Devas, nine differences are shown, but in the Tattvarthabhashya, they are reduced to eight by the words 'Ete Sarasvatadayoshtavidha Deva'.

**3. Consideration of Priority**

Although the situation of Sarvarth Siddhi and Tattvarthabhashya is quite different from the previous section,

1. Sarva Panchatvam Astikaya Avrodhat. A. 1, Su. 35. Panchaastikayo Lokah. A. 3, Su. 6. Panchaastikayaatmakam. A. 9, Su. 7.
2. Shattvam Shat Dravyavrodhat. A. 1, Su. 35.
3. A. 5 Su. 11.

Page #46:
---------------------------
Sarvarthasiddhi

It becomes clear. However, it seems necessary to shed light on some highly useful topics; because in the end, we have to see what the sequence of their composition is. To elucidate this chapter in particular, we will first speculate on similar passages and then touch upon those passages that shed light on their precedence; because first, we have to show that the position of these two texts is such that one is written by keeping the other in front, and finally, it is to be considered in which one the tendency of following is accepted. First, take the first sutra of the first chapter itself. In Sarvarthasiddhi, this sentence occurs:

"We will explain in detail the nature, characteristics, and regulations of these (topics) from the beginning." This very sentence is elucidated in Tattvartha Bhashya with some changes in words.

"We will explain in detail the characteristics and regulations of that (topic) from the beginning." Further, this similarity is seen till the end. For example - Sarvarthasiddhi
"Tattvartha Bhashya and the Tattvartha to be described, starting from jiva, etc. 1.2. The tattvas, starting from jiva, etc. will be described."

121 The characteristic of manifestation of equanimity, detachment, compassion, and faith.
Thus, the first (characteristic) is the manifestation of equanimity, detachment, compassion, and faith.

12. The characteristic of Tattvartha-shraddha (right faith in the categories of existence) is samyag-darshana (right perception). 1.21 It is said that Tattvartha-shraddha is samyag-darshana. Tattvartha-shraddha is said to be samyag-darshana. Now, what is the tattva? To this, Utsanika 1,41 says: "There, what is the tattva?" To this, it is said: Utsanika.

1,41 That is, the jiva (living being) is of four kinds: nama-jiva (nominal living being), sthapana-jiva (established living being), dravya-jiva (substantial living being), and bhava-jiva (psychical living being).

151 He who is established in wood, books, paintings, arts, and deposits, is the sthapana-jiva (established living being).
1,51 The one who is established as a jiva is the sthapana-jiva.
151 What is the special feature here? It is due to the specific speaker. What is the specific feature? Here, it is said that there are three speakers: the omniscient Tirthankara, or the learned scholar.

The specific speakers are indeed determined. That is, by the omniscient supreme sages, the supreme auspicious, the unique absolute knowledge, the specific meaning, and the scriptural establishment, the Tirthankara name-karma is designated. Due to its direct perception and the elimination of flaws, it is said by the excellent disciples that the supreme excellence of speech and authority is possessed by him. That which is entered into the group of the excellent disciples, endowed with the excellence of intellect, is the one established in the limbs. The composition of scriptures by the Shruta-kevalins (omniscient by scriptures) immediately after the Ganadhara is the characteristic of the limb. However, the supreme refined scriptural authority is the measure, due to its authority. The Acarya (teacher) is again the one who, for the benefit of the disciples with limited strength and short lifespan due to the defect of time, has briefly expounded what was taught by the Ganadhara for the grace of the disciples with limited strength and short lifespan.

1,20. Here, we have cited only a few examples to clarify this topic. Further, we need to touch upon those passages that help to clarify the precedence of Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvartha Bhashya.

Pandit Sukhlalji Sanghavi, in his work "Prajnacaksu", has considered the question of which of Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvartha Bhashya was written first, and has shed light on this topic through three sub-topics: difference in style, development of meaning, and sectarian affiliation. Based on these grounds, he has attempted to establish Tattvartha Bhashya as the earlier work.

According to Pandit Sukhlalji, let us assume that the style of Sarvarthasiddhi is more developed and more thoroughly studied compared to the style of Tattvartha Bhashya. It is also assumed that there are clear signs of semantic development in Sarvarthasiddhi from the perspective of grammar. However, the attempt to declare Tattvartha Bhashya as the earlier work and Sarvarthasiddhi as the later work based on these grounds does not appear to be justified. Acharya Pujya

Page #47:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The "Jainendra Vyakaran" written on top of the "Padaka Vyakaran" is famous. He had also written a treatise on Nyaya, which is known from the mention in the Dhavala commentary. In such a situation, it is natural for the "Sarvarthasiddhi" composed by him to have a detailed and clear discussion of these subjects. But the situation of the reader Umasvati is completely different. He was mainly an Agamic scholar. All his works that have been available so far are in accordance with the Svetambara Agam tradition. The reason is that he has not specifically speculated on grammar and philosophy in the Tattvarthabhashya.

His third objection is of sectarianism. Panditji has chosen four such topics presented in the Sarvarthasiddhi in which he finds the smell of sectarianism. He writes that "Kalatattva", Kevalikavalaahar, Achalakatva and Strimoksha, etc., were written after taking the form of intense differences of opinion on these matters and after sectarian insistence on these matters, while this element of sectarian attachment is not visible in the Bhashya.

Before considering this subject in detail, it seems necessary to consider why Panditji dares to write such a thing.

After Lord Mahavira attained liberation, there were five Shrutakevalis, the last of whom was Bhadrabahu. During his time, there was a twelve-year famine in North India. Due to this, Bhadrabahu along with the Sangha went to the south. The Svetambara tradition also mentions this famine and accepts the fact that the Sangha scattered near the sea. At that time, Bhadrabahu's main disciple, Maury Chandragupta, also went with him and, on reaching there, Bhadrabahu attained Samadhi due to his declining age. But some Sadhus and Shravakas stayed in Patna at the special request and, due to circumstances, they accepted clothes, which is considered to be the origin of the Svetambara Sangha in the Jain tradition. When the twelve-year famine ended, some Sadhus returned to Patna. According to the Svetambara tradition, "Bhadrabahu was then in the Terai region of Nepal and was engaged in special penance for twelve years. The Sangha called Bhadrabahu to Patna, but he did not come, due to which he was threatened to be expelled from the Sangha and somehow he was persuaded to teach the disciple community. Sthulabhadra received Angajnan from him. Even if we accept this statement of the Svetambara sect as true, then also the Svetambara sect accepting its tradition from Sthulabhadra and the non-inclusion of Bhadrabahu in the Patna recitation are two things that indicate a major explosion in the Jain Sangha at that time. It is clear that the recitation at that time did not represent the entire Jain Sangha and the Ang literature that was compiled and written later was done with the view of establishing the clothed Sadhus in the Jain tradition. The Svetambara Ang literature available at this time is a compilation from about a thousand years after Lord Mahavira's liberation. It is a matter of thought that when the first recitation took place during the time of Bhadrabahu, why was it not preserved by writing it down at that time? The sequence of events shows that there must have been intense differences of opinion within the Svetambara Sangha at that time and one group would say that it is not desirable to change the Ang literature even in the situation of Sanghabhed. It is very possible that if the Svetambara Ang literature had been compiled and written down at that time, its present form would have been different.

Although there are mentions in the Svetambara Ang literature that support nudity, but
1. The matter of intense differences of opinion within the Sachela group is also accepted by the wise Pandit Sukhlalji. He writes... "After Mathura, there was a Shruta-Sanskar in Vallabhi, in which the differences of opinion of the Sthavir or Sachela group also remained." See Tattvarth Sutra Introduction p. 30.

Page #48:
---------------------------
## 38
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

These references cannot be considered as a test of their authenticity. In fact, they have been accepted due to circumstances. It is not that the wise Pandit Sukhlalji is unaware of this situation. Knowing this, he is trying to ignore this situation for some reason and is trying to declare that the statements supporting Achalaktava in the Svetambara Angasutra are indicative of the complete representation of the tradition of Bhagwan Mahavira.

It is true that both Achalaktava and Sachalaktava have been given a place in the Shraman tradition and it is also true that Achalaktava is considered Utsarg Dharma and Sachalaktava is considered Apavad Dharma. We also find such references in the literature of the Digambar tradition which confirms this fact. But there, Achalaktava refers to Muni Dharma and Sachalaktava refers to Grihastha Dharma or Shravak Dharma. Shravak Dharma is an exception to Muni Dharma. Where a householder becomes a Muni by avoiding all kinds of violence, falsehood, theft and non-Brahma, there it is also necessary for him to avoid all kinds of possessions. In the Svetambara Angasutra and the miscellaneous literature, accepting clothes and utensils has also been considered a means of restraint, but the means of restraint can be that which is not necessary for the comfort of the body but is accepted only for the avoidance of animal suffering. But to say that clothes and utensils are accepted for the avoidance of animal suffering seems exaggerated, because this work is not visible through these means. Secondly, if we consider them as an essential part of the said work, then it cannot be considered to make the law of nudity and Panipatratva. But we see that in the Svetambara Agam, there is also a provision for Achalatva and Panipatratva, therefore, clothes and utensils cannot be instruments of restraint according to them. There is a discussion about Utsarg and Apavadling. It is said that nudity and Panipatratva are Utsarg Ling, but there should also be an exception to it and clothes and utensils are accepted as an exception. We believe that every Utsarg has an exception and this system has also been accepted by the Shraman tradition. That is why it directs these two distinctions of Muni Dharma and Grihastha Dharma. Muni Dharma is Utsarg Ling and Grihastha Dharma is its exception. Therefore, accepting clothes and utensils cannot be a part of Muni-Achar. Even though there has been such a situation during the time of famine that the saints who remained in North India at that time had to accept clothes and utensils. Not only this, they also had to accept punishment due to some reason. But considering them as a sign of a saint is against the Muni-Marg. We have already told you that those who accept clothes etc. due to weakness are Shravaks. Their results cannot be in accordance with Muni Dharma.

Despite this situation, clothes, utensils etc. have been considered as parts of a saint in the Svetambara Angasutra due to insistence and their two distinctions of Jinkalp and Sthavirkalp have been made. Due to this, the wise Pandit Sukhlalji has also been forced to support it. Otherwise, he would not only accept the facts that he finds the smell of sectarianism in the direction of, but he would also help in paving the way forward by avoiding a very big mistake that happened in the Shraman tradition due to circumstances.

We have already indicated that Panditji has chosen four such things from Sarvarthasiddhi, which he considers to be of a sectarian category. In Sarvarthasiddhi, the law of time element has been made decisively, while it is mentioned in Tattvarthabhashya as a special opinion. Sarvarthasiddhi accepts nudity by prohibiting Kevalikavalaahar and female liberation, while Tattvarthabhashya accepts nudity in the context of Parisha and also makes a provision for clothes, utensils and female Tirthankar. This is the situation of Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthabhashya, due to which Panditji has formed his opinion about Sarvarthasiddhi in this way and on this basis, he has tried to prove Tattvarthabhashya as older than Sarvarthasiddhi. In this matter, Panditji's opinion is that
1. The meaning of the writings of the wise Pandit Sukhlalji. See, Tattvarth Satra Preface p. 291

Page #49:
---------------------------
## Introduction
39
'The *Sarvarthasiddhi* was written only after communal bias had increased, while the *Tattvarthabhashya* is completely devoid of such bias.'
We have already explained how the ascetics in the Jain tradition accepted clothes and utensils under certain circumstances. We have also mentioned that the *Shvetambara Angashruta* was composed after the 5th century. Therefore, it is certain that the *Tattvarthabhashya* was written sometime after that, because, in the words of the commentator himself (the *Tattvarthabhashyakar*), the *Angashruta* that he relied upon as the basis for the composition of the *Tattvarthabhashya* was completely accepted by the *Sthavira* sect. This statement is supported by this meaning.
Generally, this difference of opinion began to manifest itself in an aggressive form only after the *Shvetambara Angashruta* became established as a canonical text. Because, the inclusion of topics like clothed liberation and female liberation in such an important literature as the *Angashruta*, which is said to be part of the Jain tradition, was an event that destroyed and corrupted the old tradition. During this period, on the one hand, while the aforementioned matters were being ordained under the influence of communal bias, on the other hand, it became imperative to refute them from a theoretical perspective and to declare them as the cause of bondage due to philosophical delusion. The *Sarvarthasiddhikar* has done this work, and he has done it with firmness. In fact, the burden of protecting the theoretical side was on him during that time, and he has fulfilled it beautifully.
In such a situation, we should consider the chronology of the *Sarvarthasiddhi* and the *Tattvarthabhashya* based on other evidence. It is secondary to decide this based on stylistic differences, semantic development, and communalism. Therefore, let us decide this truth in the light of other evidence.
At this time, two main commentaries on the *Tattvarthabhashya* are available... the first is the commentary by *Haribhadra*, and the second is the commentary by *Siddhsenagani*. Although *Acharya Haribhadra* and *Siddhsenagani* were contemporaries or slightly later, they came after *Bhattakalankadeva*. Not only that, *Siddhsenagani* has also extensively used the works of *Bhattakalankadeva*, which is evident from his commentary. However, *Prajnakshu* Pandit *Sukhlalji*, while agreeing with this opinion, goes further. He writes on page 96 of the introduction to the *Tattvarthsutra*:
'While describing the commentary on the same sutra in some places, he specifies five or six different opinions. This gives reason to assume that when *Siddhsen* composed the *Vritti*, there must have been at least five commentaries written on the *Tattvarthsutra* in front of him; which seem to be separate from the three famous *Digambara* interpretations like *Sarvarthasiddhi* etc. Because, it is very likely that the *Rajavartika* and the *Shloka-vartika* were composed before the *Siddhseniya Vrittika*. Even if it was composed before them, there is at least this much difference between their compositions that *Siddhsen* did not have the opportunity to get acquainted with the *Rajavartika* and the *Shloka-vartika*.
Here, we must first criticize Panditji's statement and then see if *Siddhsenagani's* commentary was written without relying on the *Rajavartika*.
Panditji has first assumed five or six independent commentaries written on the *Tattvarthsutra* based on *Siddhsenagani's* commentary on chapter five, sutra three. We accept this on this basis. However, how can it be concluded from this that *Siddhsenagani* wrote his commentary without relying on the *Tattvarthavatika*? This only reveals that there were many other commentaries in front of him that presented many readings of the sutra 'Nityavasthananyaruparani'. This is a separate topic and should be discussed separately.
1. *Prajnakshu* Pandit *Sukhlalji* states on page 95 of the introduction to the *Tattvarthsutra* that the commentary by *Haribhadra* was completed by three writers, and this opinion seems appropriate from looking at the commentary.

Page #50:
---------------------------
It should be considered that when Siddhasena Ganika wrote his commentary on the Tattvartha Sutra, did the Tattvarthavartika exist or not? This is the relevant point to be considered.

There is no doubt that Siddhasena Ganika was a great scholar. In his commentary, he has mentioned many variant readings, different opinions, texts, Acharyas and proofs of the Tattvartha Sutra, which shed light on many historical facts. In this context, he has not forgotten Bhatta Akalanka Deva's Siddhivinischaya and Tattvarthavartika. While mentioning Siddhivinischaya in the commentary on Chapter 1, Sutra 3, he writes:

"Thus, the relationship between cause and effect is to be understood as the form of the result, which is determined by the cause, as explained in the Siddhivinischaya, which is to be applied by those who seek special meaning through the door of criticism."

Siddhivinischaya is one of the most influential philosophical works available in the literature of Bhatta Akalanka Deva, and it also contains the section on the examination of creation. This confirms that this reference is to the same Siddhivinischaya. We have also done a comparative study of Siddhasena Ganika's commentary with the Tattvarthavartika. From this, we have reached the conclusion that the Tattvarthavartika must have been available to Siddhasena Ganika when he wrote his famous commentary on the Tattvarthabhashya. For comparison, see:

"The case ending arises due to the meaning. For example, "Pray to the high houses of Devadatta." Devadatta is understood." - Tattvarthavartika, Chapter 1, Sutra 7

"The case ending arises due to the meaning, "Pray to the high houses of Devadatta." - Si. D. Utpanika, commentary on verse 6

Similarly, other sentences indicating similarity are available, which have been pointed out by Pandit Paramananda Shastri in Anekanta Varsh 3, Kiran 11, in the context of Sarvarthasiddhi and Rajanaitik Lekh. In addition to these sentences indicating similarity, there are also some mentions in Siddhasena Ganika's commentary, which provide special support for his position being established after the Tattvarthavartika, such as:

In the Tattvarthavartika, while explaining the causes of hell, this sentence comes:

"He who has many beginnings and attachments, he is one who has many beginnings and attachments."

Siddhasena Ganika expresses the same point with a difference of opinion in these words:

"Others say - He who has many beginnings and attachments, he is one who has many beginnings and attachments."

The explanation of this verse is also available in Sarvarthasiddhi. Therefore, it can be said that Siddhasena Ganika must have expressed this difference of opinion with Sarvarthasiddhi in mind. However, there is a fundamental difference between the above-mentioned analysis and the analysis done for the verse in Sarvarthasiddhi. In Sarvarthasiddhi, this analysis is available as follows:

"He who has many beginnings and attachments, he is one who has many beginnings and attachments."

But Siddhasena Ganika's commentary follows the Tattvarthavartika in this matter, not Sarvarthasiddhi. Therefore, we are compelled to believe that Siddhasena Ganika is referring to the Tattvarthavartika author by the word "others" here.

In Siddhasena Ganika's commentary, there are other mentions of readings or differences of opinion that point towards the Tattvarthavartika.

This makes it clear that Siddhasena Ganika must have had the Tattvarthavartika in front of him when he wrote his commentary on the Tattvarthabhashya.

1. For this, see the Utthanika of the first Sutra and Chapter 6, Sutras 16, 17, 18, etc.

Page #51:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The time has come to determine the chronological order of the *Tattvarthabhashya* and the *Tattvarthavartika*. To do this, we need to compare the two works.

It is generally accepted by all wise men that the *Tattvarthavartika* was written after the *Sarvarthasiddhi*. There is clear evidence that the *Tattvarthabhashya* must have been composed before the *Tattvarthavartika*. We need not look for evidence elsewhere, as the *Tattvarthavartika* itself bears witness to this.

First, consider the *Uttanika* of the *Tattvarthavartika*. There is a difference in the explanation of the reason for the composition of the *Tattvarthsutra* in the *Sarvarthasiddhi* and the *Tattvarthabhashya*. The *Sarvarthasiddhi* states that a learned monk, sitting in an assembly of monks, asked the Acharya, "O Lord, what is the benefit of the soul?" The Acharya replied, "Moksha." The monk then asked, "What is the means of attaining it?" In response to this question, the *Tattvarthsutra* was composed. However, the *Tattvarthabhashya* presents a different account of the *Uttanika*. It states that in this world, it is rare to find teachings on the benefit of the soul without the path of Moksha. Therefore, the path of Moksha is taught.

Now, read the *Uttanika* of the *Tattvarthavartika* in light of these two accounts. It will be evident that it clearly refers to both the *Uttanika* of the *Sarvarthasiddhi* and the *Tattvarthabhashya*. Moreover, the reference to the *Uttanika* of the *Tattvarthabhashya* begins with the word "Apare." This clearly indicates that the author of the *Tattvarthavartika* considered the *Uttanika* of the *Sarvarthasiddhi* to be the one accepted by the Digambara tradition, and the *Uttanika* of the *Tattvarthabhashya* to be another. This is the case with the *Uttanika*.

Next, consider the *Sutra* text. The author of the *Tattvarthabhashya* has accepted the reading "Pruthutara" in the first *Sutra* of the third chapter. In the Svetambara Agama literature, the reading "Chhatai Chhatta" is available to express this meaning. The author of the *Tattvarthabhashya*, while explaining this word, has clarified it using the phrase "Chhatratichhatrasansthita." This reading is not found in the *Sutra* text accepted by the *Sarvarthasiddhi*. The author of the *Tattvarthavartika* not only notices this but also criticizes it, attempting to show that the reading "Pathutara" in the *Sutra* is inappropriate.

Generally, there are significant changes in the *Sutra* text accepted by the *Tattvarthabhashya* compared to the one accepted by the *Sarvarthasiddhi*. However, the author of the *Tattvarthavartika* does not discuss all these *Sutra* texts. He mainly opposes those *Sutra* texts of the *Tattvarthabhashya* that, if accepted, would clearly contradict the Agama. In the fourth chapter, the *Sutra* "Sesha Sparsh" etc. appears. According to the *Tattvarthabhashya*, the reading "Dvayordvayo" is found at the end of this *Sutra*. Bhatta Akalankdeva's keen observation falls on this reading, and he considers it unacceptable to accept this additional reading, pointing out its contradiction with the *Aarsh*. Similarly, in the fifth chapter, the *Sutra* "Bandhe Adhiko Parinamiko Cha" appears. However, in the *Tattvarthabhashya*, its modified form is found as "Bandhe Samadhiko Parinamiko."

It is clear that the word "Sama" in this *Sutra* does not align with the arrangement of bondage as described in the Agama. This fact is not hidden from the author of the *Tattvarthavartika*, and therefore, due to its contradiction with the Agama, he explicitly declares its lack of authenticity. The same is the case with the last three *Sutras* of the fifth chapter in the *Tattvarthabhashya*. These *Sutras* are:

"Anaviravimamscha || 42 || Rupichvaaviman || 43 || Yogoupayogi Jiveshu || 44 ||"

These *Sutras* distinguish between the beginningless and beginningful aspects of the *Parinam* (transformation), and call the *Parinam* of the *Pudgala* and the *Jiva* beginningful.

1. See *Tattvarthabhashya Uttanika* verse 31.
2. *Tattvarthavartika Uttanika* page 1.
3. *Tattvarthavartika Uttanika* page 3.

Page #52:
---------------------------
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
is. Also, in the commentary of the 42nd Sutra, Dharma, Adharma, Akash and Jiva's parinaama are said to be anaadi. On this, in the Tattvarthavartika, an objection is raised, saying...-'Atranye Dharmaadharmakalaakashaeshv anaavi: parinaama: maavimaan jeevapudgaleshu vadanti tavayuktam.'
That is, other people say that parinaama in Dharma, Adharma, Kaal and Akash is anaadi, and in Jiva and Pudgal they say it is saadi, but their saying so is inappropriate.
Similarly, from the Tattvarthavartika of Chapter 1 Sutra 15 and 21; Chapter 2 Sutra 7, 20 and 333; Chapter 4 Sutra 8; Chapter 5 Sutra 2-3, Chapter 6 Sutra 18 and Chapter 8 Sutra 6, it is also known that the Tattvarthabhashya was definitely in front of Akalankdev.
Although there is some difference of opinion in this matter. Dr. Jagdishchandraji wrote an article in this regard in Anekant Varsh 3 Kiran 4, in which he explained that the Tattvarthabhashya of Umaswati was present in front of Akalankdev. But Pandit Jugulkishoreji Mukhtar does not accept this opinion. Pandit Kailashchandraji Shastri also has the same opinion.
We believe that there is no clear evidence to support the fact that the Sutra text accepted by the reader Umaswati in the Tattvarthabhashya was present before the writing of the Tattvarthabhashya. The difference of opinion regarding the Sutra text, which Acharya Pujyapad and Siddhasenagani have discussed in their commentaries, is also not related to the Tattvarthabhashya accepted Sutra text. In such a situation, it seems weak to us to believe that the Tattvarthabhashya of the reader Umaswati was not in front of Bhatta Akalankdev. By observing all the commentaries of Digambar and Shwetambar written on the Tattvarth Sutra, we can only be sure that the great Acharya who composed the Tattvarth Sutra did not write any commentary or Vritti text on the Tattvarth Sutra. The various differences of opinion regarding the Sutra subject that appear in the Tattvarth Sutra in later times are evidence of this. It is clear that until the time of Acharya Pujyapad, these differences of opinion were very few. But on the other hand, the acceptance of the original Sutra text by the Digambar tradition through Sarvarthasiddhi led to a strong reaction and the original Sutra text was abandoned. As a result, not only did the differences of opinion regarding the nature of the Sutra text start increasing, but also the feeling of establishing an independent Sutra text arose. Based on all these events and facts, our opinion is that the reader Umaswati himself would have given the final form to the Sutra text accepted by his Tattvarthabhashya, and so that this difference of opinion regarding the text would not take an aggressive form, he himself would have written his famous Tattvarthadhigamabhashya on it. It is true that before the reader Umaswati, other Shwetambar Acharyas had cut and trimmed the original Tattvarth Sutra, and the reader Umaswati inherited it. If Pandit Jugulkishoreji Mukhtar proposes this opinion keeping this intention in mind that the Sutra text accepted by the Tattvarthabhashya was also present before the reader Umaswati, then this statement may be possible to some extent, but it does not affect the opinion that the Tattvarthabhashya was present in front of the Tattvarthavatikakar, because the Tattvarthavatik does not only mention the differences of opinion regarding the Sutra text accepted by the Tattvarthabhashya, but also mentions some opinions that are directly related to the Tattvarthabhashya.
Thus, even if we accept that the Tattvarthabhashya was written before the Tattvarthavatik, in the light of these evidences, it becomes a matter of consideration when it was written. We have many perspectives on this.
1. See Anekant Varsh 3 Kiran 4, 11 and 121 2. See Pandit Kailashchandraji's Tattvarth Sutra Preface page 9 etc. 3. See Sarvarth Siddhi A. 1 S. 16 and A. 2 S. 53 and Siddhasen's commentary A. 1 S. and A. 5 S. 3 etc. 4. See the section 'Difference of opinion in Sutra texts' in the current preface.

Page #53:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This section is meant for review. The topics of review are: 1. References to other commentaries, 2. Sutra references, and 3. Development of meaning.

1. **References to other commentaries:** According to the prevailing tradition, it is generally believed that **Sarvarthasiddhi** is the first commentary on the Digambara tradition's accepted Sutra text, and **Tattvarthabhashya** is the first commentary on the Svetambara tradition's accepted **Tattvarthasutra**. Some scholars even believe that **Tattvarthabhashya** is the original work of the author of **Tattvarthasutra**. Based on this, they conclude that Acharya Pujyapada revised the original Sutra text and created the Sutra text accepted by **Sarvarthasiddhi**, which is prevalent in the Digambara tradition today. However, the facts emerging from these commentaries and other evidence make this subject worthy of much consideration. We have already mentioned two readings of **Sarvarthasiddhi**. If the second reading is accepted based on the Sutra text itself, then considering the first reading, it becomes easy to assume that there must have been a smaller commentary available to the author of **Sarvarthasiddhi**. Otherwise, while clarifying the differences in readings, he would not have said, "Thus they describe" etc.

In **Tattvarthavartika**, while describing the fourth Sutra of the fifth chapter, the question is raised, "Only five substances are mentioned in the **Vritti**, so the teaching of six substances does not occur." Further, while resolving this, the author of **Tattvarthavartika** says, "You did not understand the intention of the **Vrittikara**. He has mentioned five substances here, not expecting the reference to the sixth substance in the future."

Similarly, a question is raised while describing the 37th Sutra of this chapter. It is said there, "This term **Gṛṇa** is mentioned in the texts of other sects. In the **Ahata** view, only substance and category are mentioned. Therefore, only two principles are established, and based on them, **Dravyarthic** and **Paryayik** become two. If there is a substance called **guna**, then there must be a third **naya** to make it its subject. Since there is no third **naya**, therefore, no third substance called **guna** is established. And therefore, the Sutra "**Gaṇaparyayavavṛddhyam**" also does not occur." Further, while resolving this, it is said that this is not the case, because **guna** is taught in texts like **Arhatpravacana Hṛdaya** etc. And further, the sentence "**Upatan hi Arhatpravacane dravyashraya nirguna gunaha**" appears.

These two references from **Tattvarthavartika** provide information about other **Vrittis** and texts. From the first reference, we know that the author of **Tattvarthavartika** had a **Vritti** written on **Tattvarthasutra** in front of him, which mentioned five substances while describing the Sutra "**Nityavasthananyaruparani**", and the author of **Tattvarthavartika** has reconciled it here. And from the second reference, it can be assumed that the author of **Tattvarthavartika** had another independent text called **Arhatpravacana Hṛdaya** or **Arhatpravacana** in front of him, which was not only written in the Sutra style but also contained the Sutra "**Dravyashraya nirguna gunaha**", and possibly he considered it very ancient, because he has mentioned it in support of **guna** in the present context.

The question of what this **Arhatpravacana Hṛdaya** or **Arhatpravacana** is, is very serious. It is also mentioned by the commentator of **Tattvarthabhashya**, Vacaka Umasvati. He writes, "I am speaking for the benefit of the disciples of a small text called **Tattvarthadhigama**, which is a collection of a part of **Ahendvacana** and has many meanings." Similarly, Amritachandra...

1. See the introduction to **Tattvarthasutra** by Pandit Sukhlalji.
2. If it is said that "because five substances are mentioned in the **Vritti**, the teaching of six substances does not occur", then no, because of the lack of understanding of the intention.
3. "**Tattvarthadhigama** named, a small text, a collection of many meanings. I will speak of this, a part of **Ahendvacana**, for the benefit of the disciples." (22)

Page #54:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**44. Sarvarthasiddhi**

Acharya has called Samayaprabhrut as a part of Arhatpravacana in his commentary on Samayaprabhrut.  Generally, both these terms refer to the twelve angas of Jain scriptures. However, when Bhattarak Akalankadev mentions a separate text called Arhatpravacanahriday or Arhatpravacana, and even quotes a verse from it that closely resembles a sutra from Tattvarthasutra, it raises the question: Did such a great text exist, containing the secrets of the entire Jain philosophy, and was its mention mandatory for everyone? Whatever the case, one thing is clear: The author of Tattvarthavartika must have had access to other commentaries on Tattvarthasutra besides the available ones, which were different from Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthabhashya. It is highly likely that he referred to this very commentary in his Tattvarthavartika.

In this context, we have also discussed the commentary of Siddhasena Ganika. We have already mentioned that Siddhasena Ganika's commentary includes many different opinions and references regarding the sutras. A close examination reveals that he had access not only to Sarvarthasiddhi, Tattvarthabhashya, and Tattvarthavartika, but also to many other old and new commentaries on Tattvarthasutra. This is also the opinion of the wise scholar Pandit Sukhlalji, which we have already mentioned.

These references in Sarvarthasiddhi, Tattvarthavartika, and Siddhasena Ganika's commentary suggest the existence of many other small and large commentaries on Tattvarthasutra. The question is, on what basis were these commentaries written? It is clear that those mentioned in Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthavartika were independent. We only need to consider those mentioned by Siddhasena Ganika. It is evident that due to Tattvarthabhashya, the form and meaning of the sutra text are somewhat fixed. Some errors due to the carelessness of scribes are also found in Tattvarthabhashya. However, due to these errors, it is not possible to imagine any variations or interpolations in the entire sutra text in the presence of Tattvarthabhashya. In such a situation, these commentaries must also be considered independent, similar to those mentioned in Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthavartika. The way Siddhasena Ganika mentions other opinions while pointing out differences of opinion also supports this fact.

We cannot say for sure when these commentaries were written or who their authors were. It is highly likely that all or some of them were written before Tattvarthabhashya, and their authors were Svetambara Acharyas. If this assumption, which is more likely to be true, is correct, then we have to say that Tattvarthabhashya was written at a time when many commentaries and annotations on the original Tattvarthasutra were already in circulation, one of which was Sarvarthasiddhi.

**2. Sutra References:**

Generally, commentators refer to previous or subsequent sutras to clarify a topic, provide information, or connect the next sutra. This practice is extensively followed in Sarvarthasiddhi and Tattvarthabhashya. However, while referring to previous or subsequent sutras, these commentaries only mention those sutra texts that they agree with. For example, the author of Sarvarthasiddhi has accepted the 21st sutra of Chapter 1, "Bhavapratyayavadhidevnarakanaam," in this form. Therefore, while writing the introduction to the first sutra of Chapter 4, he mentions this sutra in the same form. Similarly, the author of Tattvarthabhashya has accepted this sutra as "Bhavapratyayavadhinarakavevaanaam."

1. "Prabhrataahvayasyaharhatpravacanavayavasy" Ga. 1. Commentary.
2. See Tattvarthabhashya on Chapter 6, Sutras 3 and 4.

Page #55:
---------------------------
## Introduction
45
This is why they quote it in this form in the first sutra of the fourth chapter. Generally, these commentators quote the entire sutra in some places and a part of it in others. But whatever part they quote is complete in itself. There is no such inconsistency anywhere that while quoting a part, they leave out any part of the beginning.

In such a situation, we assumed that it would be difficult to find such a quotation in these two commentaries that would raise doubts about their position. With this in mind, we carefully examined the Sarvarthasiddhi and the Tattvarthabhashya. But we have to admit that while it is not in the Sarvarthasiddhi, there is a slip in the Tattvarthabhashya at one place which raises doubts about its position. This slip occurred while writing the commentary on chapter 1 sutra 20. The Sarvarthasiddhi sutra which deals with the subject of matigyan and shrutigyan is as follows:
'Matishrutayonibandho dravyeshvasarvaparaya yeshu.' This same sutra is available in the Tattvarthabhashya in this form:
'Matishrutayonibandhah sarvadravyeshvasarvaparaya sha.' In the Tattvarthabhashya, the word 'sarva' is accepted as an adjective to the word 'dravya' in comparison to the sutra text of the Sarvarthasiddhi. But when the same Tattvarthabhashyakar quotes the latter half of this sutra in the commentary on chapter 1 sutra 20, it takes the form of the sutra text of the Sarvarthasiddhi. As:
'Atraha-matishrutyo stulya vishayatvam vakshyati-'dravyeshvasarvaparaya yeshu' iti.' Perhaps the word 'sarva' might have been left out due to the carelessness of the scribe in this mention, but it is not right to say so, because Siddhasenagani and Haribhadra have also accepted this part of the Tattvarthabhashya in the same form in their commentaries. The question is that when the Tattvarthabhashyakar accepted the latter half of the said sutra as 'sarvadravyeshvasarvaparaya sha', why did he leave out the word 'sarva' from it while quoting it elsewhere. It does not seem reasonable to say that this happened due to forgetting the word. We admit that he would not have done so out of negligence or intentionally, yet if this inconsistency is considered to be due to forgetting, then there must be some reason for it. We believe that the text of the Sarvarthasiddhi or the Sarvarthasiddhi sutra must have been in front of him while writing the Tattvarthabhashya and without paying special attention to what text we have accepted, he quoted a part of the Sarvarthasiddhi sutra text here because it was in front of him. It is also possible that until the time of writing the commentary on chapter 1 sutra 20, he was not sure whether it would be necessary to make the word 'sarva' an adjective to the word 'T' or whether the old sutra text should be left in its original form and it is possible that due to not being able to decide anything like this, he quoted the old text here. We admit that he had already decided the form of the Tattvarthasutra before starting the Tattvarthabhashya, yet it is possible to remain doubtful about the subject of a particular sutra and to make changes in it while writing the Tattvarthabhashya. Whatever may be the case, this mention does provide enough force to conclude that the text of the Sarvarthasiddhi sutra must have been in front of the speaker Umaswatike while writing the Tattvarthabhashya.

3. Development of Meaning - Similarly, the clear manifestation of the development of meaning in the Tattvarthabhashya in the image-reflection relationship between the two and in the discussion of the object in some places also supports the said statement. For example, the sutra 'dharmastikaya bhavat' comes in the tenth chapter. Before this, it has been told that the liberated being goes up to the end of the upper world due to such and such reasons. The question is why does he not go further and in response to this, this sutra was composed mainly due to external causes. But if we leave the commentary and only

Page #56:
---------------------------
If one reads the *Sarvarthasiddhi* sutras, one has to stop here and there, and the doubt remains in the mind that what does the Acharya want to convey by not being a *dharmasthika*. This situation came to the attention of the commentator Umasvati, and he made it a part of the commentary instead of a sutra, with the intention of clarifying this situation. This action seems to have been done later. Similarly, consider the second sutra of this chapter in *Sarvarthasiddhi*. Before this, the creation of *kevalgyan* from the absence of *mohaniya* etc. karmas has been laid down. But why is their absence, a proper answer is not found in that sutra, nor does the *Sarvarthasiddhikar* touch upon this question. But this flaw bothers the commentator Umasvati. As a result, he considers the first half of the sutra *Sarvarthasiddhimany pat hetvbhav nirjarabhyam kritsnakarmavipramoksho moksha* as independent and the second half as an independent sutra, thus fulfilling this deficiency. While in *Sarvarthasiddhi* it is only connected with the word 'hastakarmavipramoksha', there the commentator Umasvati explains it for both the previous and the next sutra.

46

One such thing that deserves special attention comes from the context of the sutra that expounds the benefit of time in the fifth chapter. The topic is *paratva* and *aparatva*. Both of these are of how many types, this is indicated in both *Sarvarthasiddhi* and *Tattvarthabhashya*. While explaining their types in *Sarvarthasiddhi*, it is said - *parsvaparattve kshetrakrte kalakrte cha stah*. But in *Tattvarthabhashya*, these two differences are explained. Along with that, *prasansakrit* *paratva* and *aparatva* are also accepted independently there. The commentator Umasvati says - *parsvaparattve trividhe prasansakrte kshetrakrte kamakrte iti*.

Not only this, we see that in this regard, the *Tattvarthavatikakar* follows the *Tattvarthabhashya* itself. While explaining the sutra that expounds the benefit of time, he has mentioned these three differences of *parsa* and *aparsva* in these words - *'kshetraprasansakalanimitavaratvaparatvanavacharanamiti chet na kalopakaraprakaranat'*.

Therefore, doesn't this help in concluding that just as this example confirms the statement that *Tattvarthabhashya* was in front of the *Tattvarthavartika* author, in the same way, it also confirms the statement that *Tattvarthabhashya* is a later composition than *Sarvarthasiddhi*.

It is clear that considering from the point of view of chronology, the time of composition of *Tattvarthabhashya* is fixed after the composition of *Sarvarthasiddhi*, and considering all the situations, it also seems correct.

**Citations of other literature in *Sarvarthasiddhi***

While writing *Sarvarthasiddhi*, Acharya Pujyapada had a vast literature in front of him, relying on which he enhanced this great commentary. The prominent place that can be given to it is *Shatkhandagama*.

*Shatkhandagama* - This is the great treasure that has received the direct legacy of the *Dwadashanga* speech. Acharya Pushpadanta and Bhootbali, sitting at the feet of Acharya Dharasen and studying a part of the remaining *Dwadashanga* speech of that time, composed this great text. Its *Jivasthan*, *Kshullakabandha*, *Bandhaswamitva*, *Vedana*, *Vargana* and *Mahabandha*, these six sections contain the collection of *Dwadashanga* speech, hence it is called *Mandagama*. This great text was in front of the *Sarvarthasiddhikar* and he has also used it extensively, this is clearly known from seeing the *Sarvarthasiddhi* commentary of *Tattvarthsutra* chapter one sutra seven and eight. In it, by *nirdesha*, *swamitva* etc. and by *sat* number, *kshetra*, *sparshan*, *kan*, *antar*, *bhav* and *pabahutva*, these eight *anuyoga*, with the support of fourteen *gunasthan* and fourteen *margana*, the *jiv* element is explained.
1. A. Su. 22 *Tattvavartika*.

Page #57:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The topic under consideration naturally draws the reader's attention to the *Jīvasthāna* section of the *Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama*. The second sūtra of the *Jīvasthāna* section is:

"**Etto imesi cohasanham jīvasamāsaṇam magganaṭṭhadāe tattha imāṇi coddasa ceva dvāṇāṇi ṇāyavāṇi bhavanti.**"

This sūtra uses the term "**jīvasamāsa**" for the fourteen *guṇasthānas*. This sūtra was before *Sarvārthasiddhikāra*. He also used the term "**jīvasamāsa**" for *guṇasthāna*. For example:

"**Eteṣāmeva jīvasamāsānām nirūpaṇārtha caturdaśa mārganaṣṭhānāni jñeyāni.**"

Further, understand how *Jīvasthāna* is followed in *Sarvārthasiddhi* through the following table:

## *Jīvasthāna* and *Sarvārthasiddhi*

| *Jīvasthāna* | *Sarvārthasiddhi* |
|---|---|
| **Satprūpaṇā** | **Santparūvaṇadāe duviho ṇiddesso ogheṇa** |
| **Sāmānyena** | **Y॥8॥** |
| **Viśeṣeṇa** | **Ogheṇa atthi micchāiṭṭhī ॥9॥ sāsaṇ** |
| **Sāmānyena** | **Asti mithyādrṣṭiḥ sāsaadana. Sammāiṭṭhī. 10।।......** |
| **Viśeṣeṇa** | **Gatyānuvādena narakagatī sarvāsu tirikṣagatī maṇumagatī devagatī siddhagatī cedi | Pṛthivīṣu ādyāni caturāri guṇasthānāni santi. Tiriy124 । ṇera'iyā cauṭṭāṇesu asthi micchāiṭṭhī sāsaṇ- | ggatau tānyeva saṃyatāsaṃyataṣṭhānādhikāni santi. Maṇuṣya sammāiṭrī sammāmicchāiṭṭhī asan jadasaṃmāiṭṭhī tti | Gatī caturdaśāpi santi. Devagato nārakavat. ॥25॥ Tirikṣā pañcasu ṭhāṇesu atthi micchāiṭrī ......saṃjadā-saṃjadā tti ॥ 26 ।। Maṇussā coddasasu guṇadāṇesu atthi micchāiṭṭhī......ajogikevali tti ॥27॥ Devā cadasu hāṇesu atthi micchā'idrī... . asanjadasaṃmāiṭṭhiti. ।। 28॥** |
| **Indriyāṇuvādena** | **Asthi e'indriyā bī'indriyā** |
| **Indriyāṇuvādena** | **Eke'indriyādiṣu caturindriyati'indriyā catur'idriyā pañc'idriyā aṇ'idriyā cedi paryanṭeṣu ekameva mithyādrṣṭisthānam. Pañcendriyeṣu catur॥33॥ e'indriyā bī'indriyā tī'indriyā cari'idriyā | rdaśāpi santi. 'Asanipañc'idriyā ekkami ceva micchāiṭridrāṇe. ।। 36॥ Pañc'idriyā asanṇipañc'idiyapphuḍi jāva ajogikevali tti ॥ 37॥** |
| **Kāyāṇuvādena** | **Asthi puḍhavikā'iyā ā'ukā** |
| **Kāyāṇuvādena** | **Pṛthivīkāyādivanaspathikā'iyā te'ukā'iyā vā'ukā'iyā vaṇappha'ikā'iyā tasakā-yānteṣu ekameva mithyādrṣṭisthānam. Trasakāyeṣu catur'iyā akā'iyā cedi. ।। 39 ।। Puḍhavikā'iyā...vaṇappha- daśāpi santi. Ikā'iyā ekkami ceva micchāiṭritrāṇe. ।। 43॥ Tasakā'iyā bī'indriyappḍi jāva ajogikevali tti 144॥** |

There are two schools of thought in the *āgama* tradition regarding this topic: whether *sāsādanasamyakdrṣṭi* are born as *eke'indriyās* after death. *Kṣayaprābhṛta* supports this school of thought. However, according to the *Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama*, those *sāsādanasamyakdrṣṭi* who are born as *eke'indriyās* after death, have a *mithyādrṣṭi* *guṇasthāna* at the time of their first birth as *eke'indriyās* as a matter of rule. This is the reason why the *Jīvasthāna* *satprūpaṇā* sūtras have a single *mithyādrṣṭi* *guṇasthāna* for *eke'indriyās*.

Page #58:
---------------------------
##  **Sarvarthasiddhi**

The **Mithyadristi** guna-sthana is indicated. It is clear from the comparison that Sarvarthasiddhikar also followed the same tradition.

**Jiva-sthana Sankhya-Prarupana**

Sarvarthasiddhi Sankhya-Prarupana, according to the flow of **Mithyadristi**, is as follows:

* **Generally, the number of Jivas with Mithyadristi is infinite.** (2)
* **From **Sasan Sammaitrippahudi** to **Sanjada-Nantanantas**, the number of Jivas with **Samyagdrishti** is infinite.** (6)
* **The number of Jivas with **Asanyata Samyagdrishti** and **Sanyata Samyagdrishti** is **Asankhyey** (uncountable).** (6)
* **The number of Jivas with **Pramatta Sanjada** is **Bhagapramita** (measured by parts).** (7)
* **The number of Jivas with **Pramatta Sanyata** is **Kotiprithaktva** (measured by billions).** (7)
* **The number of Jivas with **Appramatta Sanyata** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (7)
* **The number of Jivas with **Uparshamaka** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (8)
* **The number of Jivas with **Uparshamaka** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (9)
* **The number of Jivas with **Aayogi** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (9)
* **The number of **Kevali** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (10)
* **The number of **Sayogi Kevali** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (11)
* **The number of **Sayogi Kevali** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (12)
* **The number of **Sajogikevali** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (13)
* **The number of **Sajogikevali** is **Sankhyeya** (countable).** (14)

Here, we have compared some of the principles of **Jiva-sthana** and **Sankhya Prarupana**. This comparison of all the **Prarupanas** is based on the concept of **Bimb-Pratibimb** (image-reflection). It is clear that Sarvarthasiddhikar has presented the **Prarupana** of the **Sarasankhya** etc. sutras keeping in mind the eight **Anuyogadwaras** of **Jiva-sthana**. While writing Sarvarthasiddhi, Pujyapada Swami had not only **Jiva-sthana** in front of him, but also the **Chulika** and other sections. For this, see the **Sarvarthasiddhi** commentary on the first chapter of **Tattvarthasutra**, which mentions the **Nirvesha Swamitva** etc. sutras. It explains the causes of the origin of **Samyaktva** based on the **Chulika Anuyogadwar** of **Jiva-sthana**. Similarly, the time of **Uparshama** etc. **Samyaktvas** is explained based on **Kshullakabandha**.

**A. Kundakunda**

In the Jain tradition, **Acharya Kundakunda** is considered a prominent figure among the **Shrutadhara** Acharyas who influenced the times. Based on some facts, it is said that he received the benefit of direct darshan and teachings from **Simandhar Tirthankara** in the **Videha Kshetra** and was blessed with **Charan Riddhi**. Following the tradition, he presented a clear direction of **Jain Tattva-gyan** in accordance with the path of **Moksha**, influencing the entire Jain tradition. **Jain Tattva-gyan** supports individual freedom and the only way to achieve it is through self-reliance. The way he presented this truth in beautiful words is unmatched. He was a radiant sun in the Jain tradition, illuminating all directions. In **Bodhaprabhut**, he declared himself as the disciple of **Shruta Kevali Bhadrabahu**. Starting **Sayaprabhrut**, he says, "I am narrating the **Samayaprabhrut** as spoken by **Shruta Kevali**. These words cannot be accidental. It is highly likely that he received direct or traditional knowledge of **Tattva-gyan** from **Bhadrabahu Shruta Kevali**, because the special features of the literature created by him cannot be accidental. The discussion about accepting **Vastra-Patra** (clothes and utensils) has greatly obscured the **Tattva-gyan** of the Jain tradition.

1. **"Barahangaviyani Chaudaspugvangviulavchchharan, Suyanani Bhaddabahugamayaguru Bhayavao Jayau."**

Page #59:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The only literary tradition composed by them is a ray of light that breaks through this darkness and illuminates the path of righteousness. On the one hand, to call everything except the soul and the absolute soul-related emotions, even the relative emotions residing in the soul, as "other," and on the other hand, to point out the acceptance of clothes and utensils as the path of individual freedom, what else can be said except that it is a mere irony of knowledge? We firmly believe that a religion that proclaims the independent existence of every individual and rejects the dominance of external authority by negating theism can never advocate the acceptance of clothes and utensils as a necessary part of the path to liberation. If Acharya Kundakunda has clarified any fact, it can only be this. Some scholars believe that he had a singular insistence on nudity and that this was emphasized in the Jain tradition only after him. But it seems that they want to change the direction of Jain philosophy through this accusation. In Jain philosophy, the consideration of an object is based solely on individual freedom, therefore, what else can be the path to its attainment except self-reliance? The acceptance of other substances by an individual is due to his fickleness and passions. It cannot be that an individual accepts clothes and utensils and is also considered free from attachment both externally and internally. It is clear that Acharya Kundakunda, by declaring nudity, has advocated the same path that the infinite Tirthankaras have been showing since time immemorial. Such great Acharya's works like Samayaprabhuta, Pravachansara, Panchaastikaya, Niyamasara, Dvadasha Anupreksha and Ashtabhuta etc. are available at present. Acharya Pujyapada has made full use of this literature, which is well known from the web of Sarvarthasiddhi. Acharya Pujyapada has quoted ten such verses, out of which one verse is available in Panchaastikaya, one verse in Niyamasara, three verses in Pravachansara and five verses in Dvadasha Anupreksha. We have shown in the commentary at those places which chapter of those texts these verses belong to.

## Mulaachar

Mulaachar is the first text that advocates the conduct of monks, accepted in the Digambara tradition. Its author is Acharya Vattkeera. Our fellow scholar, Pandit Heeralaalji Shastri, has interpreted "Vattkeera Acharya" as "Vartka Elaacharya" and has inferred Acharya Kundakunda as its author. His 2-3 articles on this subject have been published in this year's Anekanta, which present a new direction of thought. But it does not seem possible to reach the conclusion from those articles that Acharya Kundakunda has given it a concrete form. In Mulaachar, there is a chapter named Dvadasha Anupreksha. Acharya Kundakunda has independently composed the "Barah Anupekkha" text. At least this suggests that the author of the Mulaachar text should be Acharya Vattkeera, not Acharya Kundakunda. Viraseen Swami has mentioned it as Aachaarang in Dharala Tika and has quoted a verse from it. Here, Acharya Pujyapada has also given two verses of it in Sarvarthasiddhi.

## Panchasangrah

Panchasangrah holds a very important place in the Digambara tradition. In this regard, we had shed light in the preface of the Shwetambara Granthasaptatika, expressing the possibility that its compilation had already taken place before the Shwetambara Panchasangrahkartaa Chandrashimhattar. Two verses of it have also been quoted by Acharya Pujyapada in Sarvarthasiddhi. This indicates that it is very likely that the compilation of the Digambara tradition-accepted Prakrit Panchasangrah took place before Acharya Pujyapada. Now this text has become available and has come to light. Acharya Amitagati has compiled the Sanskrit Panchasangrah based on this.

## Paniniya Vyakaran

Acharya Pujyapada himself has written "Jainendra Vyakaran" and on it, the Nyasa of...

Page #60:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

It is well-known that the author of Sarvarthasiddhi is the same person who wrote it. Therefore, there is a doubt that he might have only mentioned the sutras of the Jainendra grammar he created in Sarvarthasiddhi. This question was before us during the time of the editor of Sarvarthasiddhi, and from this perspective, we also looked at Sarvarthasiddhi. However, considering the sutras mentioned in it, we have reached the conclusion that there was no such insistence on his part to only quote the sutras of the Jainendra grammar he created. Although the mention of sutras in Sarvarthasiddhi is very rare, the way they are mentioned in two or three places shows that both Panini and Jainendra grammars were used in this work. For example:

Firstly, we see the mention of two sutras in the commentary of Sarvarthasiddhi on chapter 4, sutra 19. The first one is 'tad asminn asti iti', and the second one is 'tasya nivasah'. The first sutra is available in Panini's grammar as 'tasminn asti iti des tamnami 4 267', and in Jainendra grammar as 'tavasminn asti iti desah khi 4, 1, 14'. Therefore, it is difficult to say whether Acharya Pujyapada has relied on Panini's sutra or Jainendra's sutra here. The second sutra is available in Panini's grammar as 'tasya nivasah 4, 2, 69', and in Jainendra grammar as 'tasya nivasadur bhayoh 3, 2, 19'. It is clear that Acharya Pujyapada has mentioned the sutra of Panini's grammar here.

In the commentary of Sarvarthasiddhi on chapter 5, sutra 1, the sutra 'visheshanam visheshyen iti' is mentioned. Jainendra grammar has marked this in the same form at number 1, 3, 52, and in its place, the sutra of Panini's grammar is 'visheshanam visheshyen bahulam'. It is clear that Acharya Pujyapada has mentioned the sutra of his own grammar here.

This was the discussion about the sutras. Now, look at another evidence - in the commentary of chapter 5, sutra 4, Acharya Pujyapada has mentioned the word 'mevetyah'. But there is neither any sutra in Jainendra grammar to prove the word 'nitya' nor any indication of the 'ty' suffix. There is the 'y' suffix in place of the 'ty' suffix. This shows that Acharya Pujyapada has written this sentence keeping in mind Katyayana's Varttika 'tyabane dhruva iti vaktavyam 4, 2, 104'. Acharya Abhayanandi has definitely created this Varttika 'vam iti vaktavyam' in his Vritti. But it is a later composition. Still, the said word is definitely controversial.

In the light of these facts, it becomes clear that Acharya Pujyapada has used Panini's grammar as well as Jainendra grammar in his Sarvarthasiddhi commentary, and it becomes clear that he wrote the Sarvarthasiddhi commentary only after the creation of Jainendra grammar. In the commentary of Sarvarthasiddhi on chapter 10, sutra 4, Acharya Pujyapada has used the term 'ka' for the fifth case ending. Acharya Pujyapada has defined seven case endings in his Jainendra grammar by adding 'ma' to the consonant letters of the word 'vibhakti' and 'v' to the vowel - ba, ipu, bha, ap, ka, ta, ipu. According to this, 'ka' is the indication of the fifth case ending. This is also an evidence that indicates that Jainendra grammar was created before Sarvarthasiddhi was written.

Katyayana wrote Varttikas on the grammar sutras of Panini. In the commentary of Sarvarthasiddhi on chapter 7, sutra 16, Acharya Pujyapada has quoted his Varttika 'ashvavrishabhayo maithuneshchaayam' by calling it 'shastra'. This is the first Varttika of Katyayana on Panini's 7, 1, 51.

Patanjali Mahabhashya - Patanjali Rishi has become a great scholar in the Vedic tradition. The Patanjali Mahabhashya available on Panini's grammar at this time is his immortal work. He is also the author of Yogadarshan. This is clear from it.

Page #61:
---------------------------
## Introduction
"I bow down to Patanjali, the best among the sages, who has removed the impurities of the mind through Yoga, the impurities of speech through grammar, and the impurities of the body through medicine."

There is disagreement about the time period of Patanjali Rishi. However, it is certain that he did not exist before the second century BCE. At present, we have the Patanjali Mahabhashya and the Sarvartha Siddhi. A comparative study of these two reveals that the literature of Acharya Pujyapada, especially the Sarvartha Siddhi, has been deeply influenced by the Patanjali Mahabhashya. Observing both, it becomes clear that there are many passages in the Sarvartha Siddhi that are adorned by the support of the Patanjali Mahabhashya. To clarify this, look at the following comparison:

## Patanjali Mahabhashya
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** Whether it is a rule or a prohibition that follows.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Whether it is a rule or a prohibition that follows. Many words have the same meaning. For example,
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** Even though there is a difference in nature, due to the strength of usage, there are synonyms like Indra, Shakra, Puruhut, Purandara.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Like Indra, Shakra, Purandara. Anudara kanya.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** Like Anudara kanya. There is a number-indicating word. For example, one, two.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Number-indicating words like one, two, many.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** Many. Bahurodano bahu supa.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Bahurodano bahu supa. When a rule is started after something is established, it is for the purpose of knowledge.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** When a rule is started after something is established, it is for the purpose of regulation. I think you will go by chariot.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Come, I think you will go by chariot, you will not go.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** You have gone to your father. It was a future action. A son will be born.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Vishvadrushva, his son is born. It was a future action.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** It should not be. The use of words is for the purpose of understanding meaning. Meaning is conveyed.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Or, the use of words is for the purpose of understanding meaning. There, one word is used to express one meaning, because that meaning has already been expressed by one. The use of synonymous words is pointless. The second and third should not be used. The use of words that have already been expressed is not allowed. One thread is not strong enough for a cloth, but a group of them is.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** There is a thread that is not strong enough for a cloth, but a group of them is strong enough. One rope is not strong enough for binding, but a group of them is strong enough. These senses sometimes act independently.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** The desire for independence is seen. This eye of mine sees well.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** This eye of mine sees well. This ear of mine hears well.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** This ear of mine hears well. Sometimes they are desired to be dependent.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** In the world, the desire for dependence of the senses is seen. I see well with this eye. I hear well with this ear.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** I see well with this eye. I hear well with this ear.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** In fast, medium, and slow actions, the counting is different due to the difference in time.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** Counting.
* **Sarvartha Siddhi:** The analysis by parts, the whole, the meaning of the compound.
* **Patanjali Mahabhashya:** The analysis by parts, the whole, the meaning of the compound.

Page #62:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi
Here.
Patanjali Mahabhashya
Sarvarthasiddhi, the indication of the cause, and the mere occasion in begging, etc.
Even in the mere occasion, the designation of the cause and the agent is seen. From seeing. The indication of the cause should also be seen in the mere occasion. As long as. Just as the dung fire teaches. He would say, "The cause is the occasion," until then, he is confused. What is the purpose? From seeing in begging, etc. Even in begging, etc., it is seen that they live by begging, the dung fire teaches, etc. - He returns with wisdom. This man who is a spectator
...'He returns with wisdom. Thus, he becomes a former spectator. He sees.
This man who is a spectator, he sees. Just as clarified butter and oil are said to be mixed. Just as clarified butter and oil are said to be mixed. It is understood that they are one.
It is understood that they are one. The remainder of the sentence and the sentence itself are subject to the speaker. The remainder of the sentence and the sentence itself are subject to the speaker.
Ratnakarandaka - This is a famous text of the Digambara tradition. It explains the nature of Dharma and explains Dharma as Samyagdarshan, Samyagjnana and Samyakcharitra, and discusses these three jewels in five chapters, hence it is called Ratnakarandaka. But while expounding Samyakcharitra, it only mentions all the charitra and mainly elaborates on Vikalcharitra (Shravakaachar), hence it is also called Ratnakarandaka Shravakaachar. Generally, it is famous that it is the immortal work of Acharya Samantabhadra Swami, a famous Acharya of the Digambara tradition. All the ancient mentions found so far confirm this fact. Prabhachandra Acharya himself, who wrote a detailed Sanskrit commentary on it, also considers it to be the work of Swami Samantabhadra. As is evident from the Pushpika found at the end of each chapter. In such a situation, Ratnakarandaka must have been available to Acharya Pujyapada while writing Sarvarthasiddhi. Further, we present some such mentions of these two texts which help in making inferences about this subject. The mentions are as follows: 1. The nature of Vrata is expressed in Ratnakarandaka in these words:
'Abhimanshikrita Virativishayayogan Vratam Bhavati ||3, 30||' The same thing is expressed in Sarvarthasiddhi in these words:
'Vratam Abhisandhikrito Niyamaḥ. 7 11' Ratnakarandaka gives these five names for Anarthadanda - Papopadeśa, Hinsadaan, Apadhyan, Dushruti and Pramadacharya. These same five names are also seen in Sarvarthasiddhi. Not only this, an unprecedented similarity of words is also seen regarding some of their characteristics. For example -
'Tiryakleshavaanijyahi Saarambhapralambhanaadinaam.
Kathaprasangaprasavaḥ Smartavyaḥ Papopadeśaḥ ||' Ratna 3 || 'Tiryakaraleshavaanijyapraanivaadhakarambhaadishu Paapasamyuktam Vachanam Papopaveshaḥ. ' Sa. 7, 211
'Kshitisalilabahanapavanaram Bhavam Vipalam Vanaspati Chhevam.
Maranam Saaranam Api Cha Pramavaacharya Prabhashante ||' Ran 3, 341 'Prayojanam Antareṇ Vrukshaadi Chhevanabhumikuttanasalilasechanaaghavadyakarma Pramavaacharitam. ' Sarva. 211
See Ratnakarandaka Shravakaachar, edited by 40 Jugalkishoraji and published by Manikchandra Granthamala, Bombay, from page 5 to page 15. 2. Iti Prabhachandravirachitayaam Samantabhadra Swaamivirachitopasakaadhyavanatikaayaam Prathamah Parichhedaḥ.

Page #63:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The similarity in meaning and words in the description of *bhogopbhogavat* or *upbhogparibhogavat* in these two texts is truly remarkable. Both texts explain the types of *bhog* and *upbhog*, and preach the abandonment of much *jasghāt* and evil. Only the *Ratnakarandaka* specifically instructs the abandonment of *anupsevy*. The *Ratnakarandaka* mentions this as follows:

"To abandon *sati*, milk and meat, to abandon *pramada*, the feet of the Jinas are the refuge. || 3,38 ||"

"The *shrungaverani*, which are of many types and have little fruit, like butter, neem flower, and *tak*, are to be abandoned. || 3,39 ||"

"That which is *padanishta*, and that which is *anupsevy*, should also be abandoned. || 3,40 ||"

See the *Sarvarthasiddhi* on the same topic:

"Always abandon *mama*, with a mind free from *jasghāt*. *Ketaki*, *arjuna* flowers, *bhṛngaveramūlaka* and other things, which are the cause of many births and are worthy of the designation of *anantakāya*, should be abandoned, because they have many dangers and little fruit. || 17, 22 ||"

Despite this remarkable similarity, there are some differences between these two texts. The first difference is that the *Ratnakarandaka* defines the word *proṣadha* as *satkṛd mukti*, while the *Sarvarthasiddhi* defines it as *parva*. The second difference is that the *Ratnakarandaka* mentions the eight *mūlaguṇa* independently, while the *Sarvarthasiddhi* does not mention them at all. Therefore, there is a doubt that if the *Sarvarthasiddhi* is considered to be a later work than the *Ratnakarandaka*, then this difference should not be seen. We can ignore the meaning of the word *proṣadha*, as there is no objection to accepting it in the sense of *parva*. Even then, the instruction of the eight *mūlaguṇa* and the question of their absence is very important.

Any reader who looks back to ancient times will see that the eight *mūlaguṇa* were not mentioned separately in the duties of a *śrāvaka* in the past. Instead, *samāyika* etc. six *karma* were prevalent. This mention first appears in the *Ratnakarandaka*.

(Self) Dr. Hiralalji doubts that the *Ratnakarandaka* is a work of Śrī Swami Samantabhadra. The main reason for his opinion is that Vādirāja Sūri, in his *Pārśvanāthacarita*, after mentioning Śrī Swami Samantabhadra, the author of the *Devāgama*, first mentions Ācārya Pūjyapāda, the author of the *Jainendra Vyākaraṇa*, using the word "Dev", and then remembers the author of the *Ratnakarandaka*, addressing him as "Yogindra". Dr. Sahib believes that this "Yogindra" must be different from Śrī Swami Samantabhadra, who appears to be later than Ācārya Pūjyapāda. This is why Vādirāja Sūri remembers Ācārya Yogindra after Ācārya Pūjyapāda in his *Pārśvanāthacarita* and calls him the creator of the *Ratnakarandaka*. He has given many other proofs in support of this, but this is the main proof.

(Self) Śrī Paṇḍit Jugalkishorji Mukhtar, in the preface of the *Ratnakarandakavyākhyā*, published by the Māṇikacandra Granthamālā, has examined the *Ratnakarandaka* internally and expressed the possibility that the form in which it is available today is not its original form. Due to the carelessness of scribes and commentators, many interpolated verses have become part of the original. We believe that this verse, which advocates the eight *mūlaguṇa*, has also become part of the original in this way. Although Mukhtar Sahib does not consider the verse advocating the eight *mūlaguṇa* to be interpolated, he has not given any specific reason for this. He only concludes by saying...

1. See *Pārśvanāthacarita*, Canto 1, verses 17, 18 and 19, published by the Māṇikacandra Granthamālā.
2. See, Preface, pages 15 to 53.

Page #64:
---------------------------
## 54
## Sarvarthasiddhi

It has been said that the absence of a mention of the eight fundamental virtues in the *Ratnakaranda*, or rather, in a text dealing with the conduct of lay followers, leaves a significant gap in the text, a gap that one would not expect from an experienced author like Swami Samantabhadra.

We acknowledge that the mere mention by Vadirajsuri cannot be taken as proof that the *Ratnakaranda* is not a work of Swami Samantabhadra, as he does not strictly follow chronological order in his mentions of the Acharyas. For example, in Chapter 1, verse 20, he mentions Akalanka, and then in verse 22, he remembers the author of the *Sammati*. It is also possible that due to the carelessness of a scribe, the verse mentioning the *Ratnakaranda*, "**त्यागी स एव योगीन्द्रः**" (the renunciant, he is the king of yogis), was mistakenly placed after the verse "**अचिन्त्यमहिमा देवः**" (the god of inconceivable glory). These verses appear in this form in the printed editions.

**स्वामिनश्चरितं तस्य कस्य नो विस्मयावहम् । देवागमेन सर्वतो येनाद्यापि प्रबर्यते ॥ 1, 17॥ अचिन्त्यमहिमा देवः सोऽभिवन्द्यो हितैषिणा। शब्दाश्च येन सियन्ति साधुत्वं प्रतिलम्भिताः।। 1, 18॥ त्यागी स एव योगीन्द्रो येनाक्षय्यसुखावहः ।
अथिने भव्यसाय विष्टो रत्नकरण्डकः ॥ 1, 19॥**

However, reading verse 19 after verse 17, the phrase "**त्यागी स एव योगीन्द्रः**" clearly refers to Swami Samantabhadra, and it is possible that Vadirajsuri mentioned this verse again with the intention of revealing the authorship of the *Ratnakaranda*. But even if we accept the *Ratnakaranda* as a work of Swami Samantabhadra based on this possibility and other evidence, the absence of the eight fundamental virtues in it remains a point for consideration.

Our opinion is that the classification of the eight fundamental virtues and their inclusion in the conduct of lay followers occurred around the same time that the three categories of lay followers - *pakshika*, *naishthika*, and *sadhaka* - were established and the foundation for the exposition of the conduct of lay followers was laid. The *Ratnakaranda* contains certain seeds that suggest its compilation took place long before the development of other texts on the conduct of lay followers. Therefore, it is possible that the mention of the eight fundamental virtues in the *Ratnakaranda* is an interpolation. This possibility becomes even stronger when we consider the context in which this verse mentioning the eight fundamental virtues is included. Before this verse, Swami Samantabhadra discusses the five *anuvratas* along with their transgressions, and later he discusses the seven *sheelavratas* along with their transgressions. This verse appears between these two discussions, making it seem out of place.

## Yuktyanusasan

Another immortal work of Swami Samantabhadra, similar to the *Ratnakaranda*, is his *Yuktyanusasan*. In this work, he establishes the rule of the victorious Jinas through logical arguments, praising them. At one point, he states that he is not the guru of those who seek happiness and consider it a form of attainment by worshipping the gods through offerings of flowers, etc. The verse is as follows:

**'शीर्षोपहारादिभिरात्मदुःखदेवान् किलाराध्य सुखाभिगद्धाः।
सियन्ति बोषापचयानपेक्षा युक्तं च तेषां त्वमषिनं येषाम् ॥'**

Now, read this passage from *Sarvarthasiddhi* in light of this verse:

**"तेन तीर्थाभिषेकदीक्षाशीर्षापहारदेवताराधनादयो निवतिता भवन्ति । अ० 9, सू० 2 की टीका."**

This comparison reveals that the aforementioned statement from *Yuktyanusasan* was present before Acharya Pujyapada.

-

1. See Introduction, p. 32.

Page #65:
---------------------------
## Introduction

55
Siddhsen Divakar, a very great Acharya, emerged in the middle of the 5th and 6th centuries Vikram era, after the Dwatrimsatka-Acharya Pujyapada and Swami Samantabhadra. He is mentioned with great respect by the Digambar Acharyas. His work, the Sanmatitarka Granth, is famous. He is also considered to be the author of many Dwatrimsatkas. Acharya Pujyapada, in his commentary on the Sarvarthasiddhi, chapter 7, sutra 13, has quoted the phrase "Vijojayati chasubhih", which seems to be taken from his Siddhdwatrimsatka.

Similarly, some verses, poems, and sentences are quoted in the Sarvarthasiddhi, the source of some of which we have not yet been able to determine accurately, and some are found in texts compiled or composed after the Sarvarthasiddhi. Here, we have introduced only those texts that were definitely in front of Acharya Pujyapada.

**Mangalacharan:** This auspicious verse appears at the beginning of the Sarvarthasiddhi:

"Mokshamargasya netaram bhetaram karmabhubhritam.
Jnataram visvatattvanam vande tadgunalabdhye."

Here, the question is whether this auspicious verse is a part of the Tattvarthasutra or the Sarvarthasiddhi. Most scholars are in favor of considering it a part of the Tattvarthasutra. They present these reasons in its support:

Firstly, most of the ancient handwritten copies of the Tattvarthasutra available have this auspicious verse at the beginning. Secondly, Acharya Vidyānanda, in his Aaptapariksha, has mentioned it as belonging to the Sutrakar. For example:

"Ki punastatparameshtino gunastotram shastrachi sutrakarahaprairiti nigadyate."

Acharya Vidyānanda did not stop there. He concludes the Aaptapariksha by saying:

"Shrimadtattvarthashastraatasalilnisheritratnodbhavasya, proththanarambhakale sakalamalabhiveshastrakaraha kritam yat. Stotram tirthopamanam prathitethapatham swamiimaamsitam tat,
Vidyānanaivaih swashaktā kathamapi kathitam satyavakyārthasiddhye." || 123 ||

At the time of the creation of the wonderful ocean of the Tattvarthasastra, which is the source of excellent gems, the Sutrakar, with the intention of breaking all the karma-mala, composed the stotra, which is like a pilgrimage, and which is famous for its path to liberation. Swami has contemplated on it. Vidyānanda has described it in some way, according to his ability, for the sake of the truth of the words.

He repeated the same thing in these words:

"Iti tattvarthashastraavo munindrastotragocara.
Pranitāptaparikshayam vivadavini vrttaye." || 124 ||

Thus, this Aaptapariksha, which is the subject of the Muni's stotra, is composed at the beginning of the Tattvarthasastra to remove disputes.

These mentions in the Aaptapariksha are unambiguous. They show that Acharya Vidyānanda considers the aforementioned auspicious verse to be the work of the author of the Tattvarthasutra.

1. See Bharatiya Vidya, Part 3, page 11.
2. See Jinsen's Mahapurana.
3. See Puratan Jain Vakyasuchi, Introduction, page 132.

Page #66:
---------------------------
## All-Encompassing Success

However, these arguments are presented in support of the fact that the author of this auspicious verse is not Acharya Gaddapichch, the author of the Tattvarth Sutra:

1. If the author of this auspicious verse were the creator of the Tattvarth Sutra himself, Acharya Gaddapichch, and this auspicious verse had been available to Acharya Pujyapada along with the Tattvarth Sutra, then he would have definitely written his commentary on it. He would not have made it a part of the Sarvarthasiddhi without a commentary.

2. Acharya Pujyapada clearly indicates through the initial Uththani of the Sarvarthasiddhi that the sutra "Samyagdarshanajnanacharitranimokshamargah" was first revealed from the mouth of Acharya Gaddapichch at the request of a Bhavya. This indicates that the occasion for him to offer an auspicious invocation did not arise.

3. Bhatta Akalankdeva, the commentator of the Tattvarthavatika, also does not consider this auspicious verse to be a part of the Tattvarth Sutra. Otherwise, he would have definitely commented on it and would not have accepted the Uththani which Acharya Pujyapada has directed at the beginning of the Sarvarthasiddhi. From the perspective of the commentator of the Tattvarth Sutra, Acharya Vidyānanda's position is no different from Bhatta Akalankdeva's. He also did not comment on this auspicious verse in the Tattvarthashloka Vatika. Not only that, both these Acharyas have not included it at the beginning of their commentary texts.

These are two opinions that do not help in reaching a single conclusion. Nevertheless, we consider the arguments of the first opinion to be more factual because even about a thousand years ago, when the auspicious verse was considered to be of the author of the Tattvarth Sutra, it seems irrelevant to doubt it.

3. The question of the authenticity and inauthenticity of the old tradition-scripture by the author of the Tattvarth Sutra is a very important topic. In ancient times, all scripture writers did not mention their name, lineage, caste, place of residence, etc. at the beginning or end of the scripture, because they did not consider themselves to be the creators of that scripture. Their main task was to simply compile the twelve-fold speech of the Lord, received from tradition, in a concise, detailed, or translated form. They knew very well that giving their name, etc. along with a scripture does not increase its universal acceptance or authenticity. In most scriptures, it is said by Jinendradeva at various places, "This is what Jindeva has said," "This is the teaching of Jindeva," "We say as the omniscient Jindeva has said," with the mention of these words, their subject matter is discussed. Why? Because it should be understood that this is not the opinion of a particular individual, but the speech of the omniscient Jindeva or its essence. In fact, the interpreters of the meaning of any scripture are not hypocrites, but are dispassionate omniscients. The hypocritical Ganadharas only compile their teachings in the form of a scripture after listening to their teachings. This compilation comes down through tradition and becomes the subject of knowledge of various Acharyas, giving birth to many scattered scriptures. The ancient Acharyas understood this fact very well and therefore, they remained free from the delusion of name and form and were engaged in compiling the twelve-fold speech. Acharya Pushpadanta, Acharya Bhootbali, Acharya Gunadhar, Acharya Yativrishabha, Acharya Kundakunda, Swami Samantabhadra, Acharya Siddhasena Divakara and Acharya Pujyapada, etc. are many such Acharyas who followed this path and compiled the speech of the Lord Tirthankara and dedicated it for the welfare of the world. Why only that, Acharya Gaddapichch is also one of them who compiled a gem of a scripture like the Tattvarth Sutra based on the remaining entire Shruta and made it famous by name.

1. 'Bhanio Khalu Samvadarasihi Samayaprābha, Gāthā 701
2. 'Eso Jinovadeso' Samayaprābhūt, Gāthā 1501
3. 'Saddevikarō Hūō Bhāsāsūttesu Jam Jine Kahiyam. So Tah Kahiyam Nāyansiśēna Ya Bhaddabahuss' Bodhapahud, Gāthā 611
4. 'Tiththayarabhasiyattham Ganaharadēvēhi Gunthiyam Sammam.' Bhāvapāhuḍ, Gāthā 92.
5. See Sarva, A01, Sū 201

Page #67:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This tradition of keeping oneself free from attachment has been prevalent since ancient times. The more widespread this practice was, the more respect the Shruta-dhara Acharyas had for it.

Today, the difficulty in compiling the biographical sketches of Shruta-dhara and other Acharyas, along with a factual history of their works, stems from this very reason. We call it a difficulty in the sense that this period is about compiling historical facts, and therefore, more emphasis is placed on determining which Acharya lived in which era, what their daily life was like, and what their notable works were.

In this context, we need to consider the author of the Tattvartha Sutra. As beautiful and captivating as the compilation of the Tattvartha Sutra is from a religious perspective, there is just as much debate surrounding its author. This debate has been further fueled by the two traditions that emerged within the Jain Sangha over time. The first debate revolves around the author's name, and the second concerns the time of their existence. Here, we will first present the irrefutable evidence that helps us determine the author of the Tattvartha Sutra, and then shed light on the facts that have caused this debate.

## The Author of the Tattvartha Sutra

We will see later that Acharya Pujyapada has written extensively on various subjects. Yet, he has never mentioned his name anywhere. Not only that, but even when writing his commentary, Sarvarthasiddhi, on the Tattvartha Sutra, he follows the same path. He instructs in its introduction that a Bhavy, sitting in an ashram among a gathering of monks, approaches Acharya Vardhamana with humility and asks a question, and as a result, the Tattvartha Sutra is composed. However, he remains silent about the names of those Acharyas. Why? We understand from this that even though Acharya Pujyapada was aware of the information regarding the author of the Tattvartha Sutra, he avoided mentioning his name, perhaps to avoid any sense of self-importance. Bhatta Akalankadeva has also followed the same path. He too accepts the same introduction in the beginning of the Tattvartha Vartika that Acharya Pujyapada mentioned in the beginning of the Sarvarthasiddhi. Therefore, even though these mentions lead us to believe that these Acharyas were aware of the author's name, they do not reveal who the Acharya was who made this great effort for the welfare of Bhavy beings.

We believe that this practice of not mentioning names, particularly in the Jain tradition, continued in India until the 4th and 5th centuries CE. Some Acharyas continued this practice even after that. However, due to several reasons, this policy began to change, and scholars started mentioning their names at the beginning or end of their works. Not only that, they also began to mention their predecessors in other ways. Therefore, to accurately determine the author of the Tattvartha Sutra, we must delve into later literature. So, let's first look at the irrefutable evidence from later times that sheds light on this subject.

## Evidence from Later Literature

1. Acharya Vīrasena, a great commentator in the tradition of the Shruta-dhara Acharyas, completed his famous Dhavala commentary on the Panḍagam in the year 738 of the Saka era. His commentary contains numerous references and historical facts. He has quoted many sutras from the Tattvartha Sutra in this commentary. Not only that, but in the Jīva-sthāna-kāla-anuyoga-dvāra, he quotes a sutra from the Tattvartha Sutra along with the name of its author. He says:

"Harīyāsiyat-chatyamu-le vi vartana-pariṇāma-kriyāḥ paratva-aparatve cha kālasya chhavi bacha kālo pakavido mudrita prishtha 316"

Page #68:
---------------------------
##  58
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

This mention is clearly stated in the Tattvarthasutra by Gṛddhapichchācārya.

2. Ācārya Vidyānanda was also a great Śrutadhara Ācārya. He has enhanced the glory of Jain Śruta by composing many scriptures like Aṣṭasahasrī, Vidyānanda Mahodya, Āptaparīkṣā, Pramāṇaparīkṣā, Patraparīkṣā, Satyaśāsanaparīkṣā and Tattvārthaśloka Vārtika etc. His time of existence is considered to be from 775 AD (Śaka Samvat 697) to 840 AD (Śaka Samvat 762). He writes on page 6 of the printed Tattvārthaśloka Vārtika:

"Etena Gatapichchācāryaparyantamunisūtreṇa Vyabhicārata Nirastā."

By this, Ācārya Vidyānanda indicates that the last Sūtrakāra in the reign of Bhagavan Mahāvīra was Gṛddhapichchācārya.

Clearly, this mention indicates all the Sūtrakāras up to Ācārya Gṛddhapichchā, the author of Tattvārthasūtra. However, Paṇḍit Sukhlālji has doubts about this. He has expressed this doubt in the preface of his own written Tattvārthasūtra on pages 106-107. His doubt is particularly based on logic, so here we must first consider it from this perspective.

Paṇḍitji's argument is that the aforementioned second statement has come up in the discussion of inference that proves the point that the Sūtra on the path to liberation in the Tattvārthādhigama Śāstra is composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one. In this discussion of inference, the Sūtra on the path to liberation is the subject, the fact that it is composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one is the object to be proved, and the fact that it is a Sūtra is the reason. In refuting the fallacy of irrelevancy in this reason, Vidyānanda has made the statement "Etena" etc. The fallacy of irrelevancy is possible in a place different from the subject. The subject is the present Tattvārthasūtra on the path to liberation. From this, the Sūtra of the Munis up to Gṛddhapichchācārya, which is considered to be the subject of irrelevancy, should be different from the first Sūtra on the path to liberation, which is the subject of Umāsvāti, in the view of Vidyānanda. This point hardly needs to be explained to a student of Nyāya Vidya.

The essence of Paṇḍitji's logic-based statement is that the Sūtra of the Munis up to Gṛddhapichchācārya, which Ācārya Vidyānanda has mentioned here, is different from Umāsvāti's Tattvārthasūtra.

As far as Paṇḍitji's statement is concerned, we should not accuse it of being unreliable. However, if Paṇḍitji had paid attention to the subsidiary point raised by Ācārya Vidyānanda in the context of the aforementioned inference, we believe that he would not have tried to prove that the Sūtra of Gṛddhapichchācārya is different from the so-called Tattvārthasūtra of Umāsvāti.

The subsidiary point raised by Ācārya Vidyānanda is the refutation of the fallacy of irrelevancy by considering the Sūtra statements of Gaṇādhipa, Pratiyaka Buddha, Śruta Kevali and Abhinna Daśa Pūrvi as self-composed. It is clear that Gṛddhapichchācārya's Tattvārthasūtra is also included in this, because here it is considered to be different from the Sūtra composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one in some way (from the perspective that the author is Gṛddhapichchācārya). It would be particularly appropriate to clarify this matter in these words in the present context. In the present inference, the present Sūtra is the subject, the fact that it is composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one is the object to be proved, the fact that it is a Sūtra is the reason, the remaining Sūtra composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one is the similar subject, and the Sūtra of Bṛhaspati etc. is the dissimilar subject. By this inference, the Tattvārthasūtra has been proved to be composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one through the reason of its being a Sūtra. This proves that Ācārya Vidyānanda is not proving the Sūtra to be composed by Gṛddhapichchācārya here. He forgets the fact that from the perspective of being a Sūtra, it is composed by Gṛddhapichchācārya. He says that it is composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one, therefore it is a Sūtra.

However, if someone says that this Tattvārthasūtra is not composed by the omniscient, dispassionate one but by Gṛddhapichchācārya,

1. See the preface of Āptaparīkṣā edited by Nyāyācārya Paṇḍit Darbārilālji and published by Vīrasevamandīra, page 50.

Page #69:
---------------------------
## Introduction
59
If, in such a situation, the *Tattvartha Sutra* authored by the omniscient, *Veetrag* (freed from passions), is somehow different from the *Tattvartha Sutra* authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya, then it will fall into the category of the opposing side, similar to the Sutras authored by *Ganadhara* etc., which are considered to be on the opposing side in the inference. And accepting it as a Sutra will lead to the contradiction of the reason. Acharya *Vidyananda* has presented this contradiction and refuted it, stating this entire statement along with the conclusion:

"If it is said that there is a contradiction with the Sutra of *Ganadhip*, *Pratyekabuddha*, *Shruta Kevali*, and *Abhinna Dasha Purvi* due to self-agreement? No, because of the statement that even those are authored by the omniscient, *Veetrag*, and the meaning is explained by *Gan* (community). Thus, the contradiction with the Sutra up to *Giddhapiccha* Acharya is refuted."

Here, a contradiction is shown with the Sutra of *Ganadhip*, *Pratyekabuddha*, *Shruta Kevali*, and *Abhinna Dasha Purvi*, considering it to be self-created. Even if the *Tattvartha Sutra* is considered to be authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya, this contradiction arises because the *Tattvartha Sutra* authored by the omniscient, *Veetrag*, is the *sadhya* (probandum) in the aforementioned inference, not the *Tattvartha Sutra* authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya. Therefore, the *Tattvartha Sutra* authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya becomes the opposing side because it is against the *sadhya*. We accept that there is only one *Tattvartha Sutra*, not two, but they are considered to be two due to the difference in the author. One is the one authored by the omniscient, *Veetrag*, and the other is the one authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya. Therefore, just as it was desirable to refute the contradiction arising with the Sutra of *Ganadhip* etc., it was also necessary to refute the contradiction arising from considering it to be authored only by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya. And this is why this contradiction is refuted by the statement "Etena" etc.

Thus, we see that Acharya *Vidyananda*, similar to *Veerasen Swami*, appears to follow the same opinion that the author of the *Tattvartha Sutra* is Acharya *Giddhapiccha* Acharya. Even if we leave aside this argument-based method for a while and give priority to the opinion of the scholar, there is no obstacle in accepting the opinion that Acharya *Vidyananda*, through the statement "Etena" etc., is indicating *Giddhapiccha* as the author of the *Tattvartha Sutra*. Because Acharya *Vidyananda* had already established the *Tattvartha Sutra* authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya as a Sutra through the aforementioned inference, but it was still left to establish the composition of other previous Acharyas as a Sutra, which he has established by refuting the contradiction arising with the Sutra of other *Ganadhip* etc. Munis, up to *Giddhapiccha* Acharya, i.e., *Giddhapiccha* Acharya is the last one. Here, *Atadgunasanvijnana* is a *Bahuvrihi* compound, so this meaning is concluded.

The implication is that there is a Sutra text authored by *Giddhapiccha* Acharya, which is also accepted by Pandit *Sukhlalji*. He only has a dispute in accepting the present *Tattvartha Sutra* as his. But when he is established as the author of the *Tattvartha Sutra* from other historical facts, the meaning of the aforementioned statement of Acharya *Vidyananda* appears to be the same as we have done.

3. Acharya *Giddhapiccha* is mentioned with respect by *Vadiraj Suri* in his *Parshvanath Charit*. Possibly, this is the same *Vadiraj Suri* who wrote *Praman Nirnay*, *Ekibhav Stotra*, *Yashodhar Charit*, *Kakusthavarit*, and *Nyaya Vinishchay Vivaran* along with *Parshvanath Charit*. It is said about him:

"Vadiraj is the name of the Shambika world, Vadiraj is the name of the Takik Singh. Vadiraj is the name of the poet, Vadiraj is the name of the one who is helped by others."

He mentions Acharya *Giddhapiccha* in *Parshvanath Charit* with these words:

"I bow down to *Giddhapiccha*, who has an abundance of excellent qualities. The noble ones who are born for Nirvana consider him as a bird."

Page #70:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

I bow to those great qualities, which act as wings for the worthy who desire to fly to Nirvana.

Although Vadirajsuri does not mention any other name of Acharya Gudhapichchha here, he is remembering those scholars who have benefited the world by creating literature useful for the path of liberation. In the eyes of Vadirajsuri, Acharya Gudhapichchha, the author of Tattvarth Sutra, is the first among them.

The first two mentions of these are from the 9th century Vikram era, and the last mention is from the 11th century. This shows that until this time, the only accepted belief in the Jain tradition was that Acharya Gudhapichchha was the author of Tattvarth Sutra.

## Other Opinions

However, there are three or four other opinions against this view, which are relevant to discuss here.

1. At the end of the Shvetambar Tattvarth Bhashya, a eulogy is available. It states that "Those whose initiation guru was Ghoshanandi Ksaman, the holder of eleven Angas, and whose preceptor was the chief speaker Shivsri, whose guru in terms of recitation was the speaker named Mula, and whose preceptor was the great speaker Mundapad, who belonged to the Kobhishani gotra, and who was the son of Swati father and Vatsi mother, who was born in Nyagrodhikagrama and belonged to the Uccha Nagar branch, those Uma Swami Vachka, having properly absorbed the excellent Ahendvachan received from the guru tradition, and seeing the suffering people with their minds destroyed by the inaccessible path, out of compassion for beings, while practicing this Tattvarthadhigam named scripture, composed it in the great city of Kusumpur. Whoever knows this Tattvarthadhigam and follows the path mentioned in it, will soon attain the ultimate goal called Avyabadha Sukha."

Similarly, in the beginning of the Tattvarth Bhashya, there are 31 Uththaniika Karikas, of which the 22nd Karika states that "I speak this short Pratyaka called Tattvarthadhigam, which is a collection of a part of Ahendvachan and has many meanings, for the benefit of the disciples."

Prajna Chakshu Pandit Sukhlalji gives special importance to this Karika of Uththaniika and the final eulogy. He considers them to be from the original Sutrakar.

Apart from this, he has given two more arguments to prove that the Tattvarth Sutrakar and the Tattvarth Bhashyakar are the same.

(a) In the initial Karikas and at some other places in the Bhashya, there is a first-person pronoun like "Vakyami", "Vakyam:" etc., and according to the promise made in this pronoun, the statement is made later in the Sutra. This leaves no doubt in considering both the Sutra and the Bhashya as the work of one person.

(b) Looking at the Bhashya from beginning to end, one thing settles in the mind, and that is that there is no manipulation of words in interpreting the Sutra anywhere, there is no doubt or alternative in interpreting the Sutra anywhere, similarly, the meaning of the Sutra is not interpreted keeping in mind any other interpretation of the Sutra, and nowhere has the reading of the Sutra been relied upon.

2. Pandit Nathuramji Premi has almost the same opinion. His final article on this subject was published in the third part of Bharatiya Vidya. He has presented the same three arguments of Pandit Sukhlalji with some changes in words while proving that the Tattvarth Sutra and the Tattvarth Bhashya are the work of the same person. Only these two...

1. See the eulogy found at the end of the Tattvarth Bhashya. 2. See the introduction to the Tattvarth Sutra written by them. 3. Pandit Sukhlalji's introduction to the Tattvarth Sutra, page 21.

Page #71:
---------------------------
## Introduction

61
If there is any difference in the opinions of scholars, it is only that Pandit Sukhlalji considers Uma Swami to be of the Savastra Svetambar tradition, while Premiji considers him to be of the Yapaniya tradition.

3. Some inscriptions are found on the Chandragiri mountain in Shravanabelagola, which state that Gaddapichch was the author of the Tattvarth Sutra. In these inscriptions, only Uma Swami is mentioned with the epithet Gaddapichch in the 40th, 42nd, 43rd, 47th, and 50th inscriptions, and in the 105th and 108th inscriptions, he is called the author of the Tattvarth Sutra. According to Dr. Hiralalji, these two inscriptions are dated to the Saka year 1320 and Saka year 1355 respectively. The inscription 155 reads as follows:

'Srimanmaswatirayam Yatishastastvarthsutram prakaticakar. Yanmuktimargacharanodhatanam patheyam adhyam bhavathi prajanam ||15|| Tasyaiva sisya Ujani Gapichchdvitiyasanjnasya Balakapichch. Yatsushitaratnani bhavanthi loke muktyanganamo hanamananaani ||16||'

The Lord Uma Swami, the head of the Yatis, revealed the Tattvarth Sutra, which serves as an excellent guide for those who are engaged in the practice of the path of liberation. Gaddapichch is the second name of Balakapichch, a disciple of Uma Swami. His wise sayings are like ornaments that adorn the path of liberation and dispel delusion.

Inscription 108 records the same thing in this way:

'Abhuvumaswatimuni pavitra vamshe tabiyee sakalarthavedee. Sutrikritam yena jinpranitam shastrarthajatam manipungavena ||11||' 'Sa pranisamrakshanasavadhano babhar yogi kil gadhapkshan. Tada prabhutyeva busha yamahur acharyashamdottaragayapichch ||22||'

Although many small and large commentaries have been written on the Tattvarth Sutra at different times, only one Kannada commentary by the 13th-century scholar Balachandra Muni is known, which mentions the name Gaddapichcharya along with Uma Swami.

4. Pandit Jugul Kishorji Mukhtar follows this same opinion regarding the authorship of the Tattvarth Sutra. He considers Gaddapichch to be another name for Uma Swami.

5. In the Digambar tradition, the copies of the original Tattvarth Sutra that are available have a verse at the end:

'Tattvarthsutrakarim gadapichchopalakshitam. Vande ganindrasanjatam umaswamimunishvaram ||'

This verse identifies Uma Swami, who is known as Gaddapichch, as the author of the Tattvarth Sutra and calls him a Ganindra.

6. An inscription in Nagar Taluka mentions:

'Tattvarthsutrakaramamaswatimunishvaram. Shrutakevalideshiyam vande'ham gunamandiram ||'

This inscription mentions Uma Swami as the author of the Tattvarth Sutra and calls him Shrutakevalideshiya and Gunamandira.

7. There is also mention of Acharya Kundakunda being the author of the Tattvarth Sutra, which is contrary to the Tattvarth

Page #72:
---------------------------
##  The Author of Tattvarth Sutra: A Critical Analysis

**62**
**Sarvarth Siddhi** is one of the most important commentaries on the Tattvarth Sutra. A Shvetambar commentator of the Tattvarth Sutra was also familiar with this view. He mentioned this view in his commentary and tried to warn his community.

**Review:** There are seven different views regarding the author of the Tattvarth Sutra. Except for the mention of the early Shvetambar Tattvarth Bhashya, all other mentions are not from before the 13th century and mainly point to the two names, Gṛddhpiṭcha and Umāsvāti. The final view that "Acharya Kundakunda is the author of the Tattvarth Sutra" seems unusual, but it seems that this view gained popularity because Acharya Kundakunda was known by the name Gṛddhpiṭcha. There are two main views that need to be considered here. First, Acharya Gṛddhpiṭcha is the author of the Tattvarth Sutra, and second, the commentator Umāsvāti wrote the Tattvarth Sutra.

Generally, while discussing the topic of "Tattvarth Sutra," we have shed light on many important points by writing the section "Differences of Opinion in Sutra Texts" and comparing Sarvarth Siddhi and Tattvarth Bhashya through the section "Prioritization Consideration." The summary of these points is as follows...

1. The commentator Umāsvāti wrote the Tattvarthadhigama Shastra. But this name is not of the Tattvarth Sutra but of the Tattvarth Bhashya.
2. While mentioning the differences of opinion in the Sutra texts, it has been proven and explained that if the authors of the Tattvarth Sutra and Tattvarth Bhashya were the same person and the Shvetambar Acharyas understood this fact, then there should not have been as much difference of opinion in the Shvetambar Sutra texts as is available.
3. While considering the prioritization of Sarvarth Siddhi and Tattvarth Bhashya, we have explained that many commentaries on the Tattvarth Sutra were already in circulation before the commentator Umāsvāti wrote the Tattvarth Bhashya. There, we also mentioned a Sutra that is related to the Sarvarth Siddhi-approved Sutra text and which the commentator Umāsvāti has quoted in his Tattvarth Bhashya. Considering the development of meaning, it has also been explained in this section that when Sarvarth Siddhi and Tattvarth Bhashya are considered together, it is clear that there are many instances that prove the Tattvarth Bhashya to be a later composition than Sarvarth Siddhi. And while proving this, we have also given an example that in the section on the benefits of time, only two distinctions have been made in Sarvarth Siddhi regarding Paratva-Aparatva, while three are available in the Tattvarth Bhashya.

Therefore, even after it becomes clear from these and other facts that the commentator Umāsvāti should not be the original author of the Tattvarth Sutra, it is necessary to pay attention to some other points for the final decision on this subject.

To determine the community, etc., of any author, the scripture written by him is the main evidence. There are some seeds in any scripture that shed important light on the time of composition of that scripture and the community of the author, etc. While considering the time, etc., of the author of the Tattvarth Sutra, the wise scholar Pt. Sukhlalji has also adopted this approach. But there, he has tried to consider both the Tattvarth Sutra and the Tattvarth Bhashya as one. This has caused a lot of confusion. In fact, this matter should be considered only by keeping the Tattvarth Sutra in front, and even in that, only those Sutras of the Tattvarth Sutra should be considered which are accepted by both communities in the Tattvarth Sutra. This helps a lot in reaching a single decision through an impartial review.

1. Pt. Kailashchandraji's Tattvarth Sutra, Introduction 50 171 2. For this, see the introduction to the Tattvarth Sutra written by us. 3. See Dr. A.N. Upadhye's introduction to Pravachansara. 4. See the introduction to the Tattvarth Sutra written by Pt. Sukhlalji, page 8, etc.

Page #73:
---------------------------
## Introduction

It is clear that even though there are two versions of the Tattvartha Sutra, most of the sutras are accepted by both sects. Among these, some sutras have remained in their original form, shedding light on the author's position, etc. Here, we present four main sutras from this consideration. The first sutra is about the causes of bondage for the Tirthankara nature, the second is about the twenty-two parishahs, the third is about the eleven parishahs of the Kevali Jina, and the fourth is about how many parishahs a single being has at the same time.

1. Both traditions mention the causes of bondage for the Tirthankara nature in their original Agamas. The Digambara tradition, in its Bandhasamittvichya, mentions the same sixteen causes that are almost accepted in the Tattvartha Sutra in the same form. For comparison, see:

> Darshanavishuddhivinayasampannata Shilvateṣvanaticharo'bhiṣaṇajñānopayogasanvego Śaktitastyāgatapasi Sādhusamāṣiyāvṛsyakaraṇamahavāchāryabahushrutapravachanabhaktiravashyakāparihāṇimārgaprabhāvanāpravachanavatsalatvamiti tīrthakaratvasya.

> Tattvartha Sutra 6,241: Bansanavisuzzhavaae Vinayasampannavaaee Solamvadesu Nirvicharadaae Aavaasesu Aparihoṇavaaee Sanalavashishzhanavaaee Latisanvegasampannadaae Jasha Thaame Tatha Tave Sahun Paasuaparichagadaae Sahun Samahisandharanaae Sahanan Vejjavacchajogajasaadaae Arahantammattie Bahusubhabhattie Pavayanabhattie Pavayanavachchalavaaee Pavayanappbhavanadaae Abhikkanam Abhikkanam Nanivacchajogajuttadaae Iccedehi Solasehi Karanehi Jivaa Tithyayaranamgovam Kamma Bandhati.

> - Bandhasamittvichya 75041.

However, the Svetambara tradition accepts twenty causes instead of sixteen. In the eighth chapter of the Anga called Jnatridharmakatha, these causes are mentioned in these words:

> 'Arahanta-siddhi-pavajana guru-ther bahussuae tavassisuṁ. Bachchalaya ya tesi abhikkanṁ jaṇovoge ya॥1॥ Basaviṇae avaśśae ya solamśae niraiyāram. Khaṇalava tavacchiāe veyāvacche samāhi ya॥2॥ Apugvaṇāṇagahaṇṁ suyabhatti pavaṇe phabhāvaṇaya.
> E ehi karanehi tithyayarattaṁ lahai jivo ॥3॥'

Here, two things are worth noting in the Tattvartha Sutra: first, the mention of the number sixteen, and second, the similarity in words. In this regard, the mentioned sutra of the Tattvartha Sutra is closer to the Digambara tradition than the Svetambara tradition.

2. Both the Digambara and Svetambara traditions accept twenty-two parishahs. The sutra in the Tattvartha Sutra that mentions these parishahs includes one called 'Nagnya'. The question is why the author of the Tattvartha Sutra accepted the word 'Nagnya'. Can this word be accepted as being in accordance with the Agamas according to the Svetambara tradition? In the Agamas of the Svetambara tradition, the word 'Achel' is mentioned everywhere in place of the 'Nagnya' parishah. This is in line with that sect, because the word 'Achel' has the 'Nan' compound, which in that sect implies both the absence of clothes and 'few clothes'. However, these two meanings cannot be derived from the word 'Nagnya'. 'Nagna' is an independent word, and its only meaning is 'without covering of clothes'. It is clear that these two meanings cannot be derived from the word 'Nagnya'. 'Nagna' is an independent word, and its only meaning is 'without covering of clothes'. It is clear that this is the twenty-two parishahs...

1. See, A09 Su09.
2. Samavayanga Samavay 22 and Bhagavati Sutra 8, 8.

Page #74:
---------------------------
## Translation:

64
The Sutra that establishes the principle of *Sarvarthasiddhi* is closer to the Digambara tradition than the Svetambara tradition.

3. Considering how many *parishahs* a being can experience simultaneously, the Svetambara Agamic literature (Vyakhyaprajnapti, Shloka 8) states that a being who binds seven or eight types of karma has 22 *parishahs*. However, such a being experiences only 20 *parishahs* simultaneously. Explaining which two *parishahs* are reduced, it is stated that when the being experiences the *sheet* *parishah*, it does not experience the *ushna* *parishah*, and when it experiences the *ushna* *parishah*, it does not experience the *sheet* *parishah*. Thus, one *parishah* is reduced. Similarly, when it experiences the *charya* *parishah*, it does not experience the *nishadya* *parishah*, and when it experiences the *nishadya* *parishah*, it does not experience the *charya* *parishah*. Thus, another *parishah* is reduced. In total, there are 20 *parishahs* that the being experiences simultaneously.

However, the *Tattvartha Sutra* defines the maximum number of *parishahs* that can be experienced simultaneously as 19. We do not need to consider what is logically correct here. We only need to point out that this instruction by the author of the *Tattvartha Sutra* does not follow the Svetambara Agamic tradition.

4. "There are eleven *parishahs* for Jinas." We have already discussed this Sutra in detail in the section "Textual Variations and Interpretations." There, we clarified the author's perspective on *parishahs* by stating that the author's focus is primarily on the internal causes. By stating how many *parishahs* are present in the emergence of each karma, the author indicates the number of *parishahs* based on the differences in the recipients. However, this does not mean that the author accepts the existence of the same number of *parishahs* as mentioned for internal causes, as a rule. In the final Sutra of the *parishah* section, the author has also separately established the principle of *parishahs* based on their function. He states that although there are 22 *parishahs* in total, a being can experience one to nineteen *parishahs* simultaneously. It is clear that in light of this final Sutra, it cannot be concluded that the author of the *Tattvartha Sutra* accepts the function of *parishahs* in the same way he has established the number of *parishahs* present in the emergence of karma-created *parishahs*. It only means that even if the internal causes are present, if the external causes for those *parishahs* are not present, then there will be no *parishahs* at all. This is why the author mentions the possibility of experiencing one to nineteen *parishahs*. For example, if all the karmas of a negligent, restrained ascetic are to emerge, all *parishahs* are possible. However, if there are no external causes for their *parishahs*, they will not experience any *parishahs*. If there is an external cause for one *parishah*, then they will experience one *parishah*, and if there are external causes for more *parishahs*, then they will experience more *parishahs*. The implication is that the experience of *parishahs* cannot be attributed solely to the presence of internal causes. It is clear that the author of the *Tattvartha Sutra* does not accept the function of *parishahs* solely based on the presence of internal causes. He has only mentioned the *parishahs* based on the internal causes where they are present.

From this perspective, we have examined the Svetambara Agamic literature. However, it appears that a completely different perspective is adopted there. There, it is accepted that all *parishahs* are experienced, except for the opposing *parishahs*, out of all the possible *parishahs*. There, it is not accepted that:

1. *Tattvartha Sutra* 409, Sutra 171
2. See, page 25 onwards.

Page #75:
---------------------------
## Introduction
65
Some experience pain for one, some for two, and some for many. It is stated that those who bind seven or eight karmas have fourteen possible parishahs, but they experience pain for only twenty at a time. Those who bind six karmas have fourteen possible parishahs, but they experience pain for only twelve at a time. Those who are vitaraga, chham-sth, and bind one karma also have fourteen possible parishahs, but they experience pain for only twelve at a time. Those who are sayogi jinas, who bind one karma, have eleven possible parishahs, but they experience pain for only nine at a time. And those who are abandhak, ayogi jinas, also have eleven possible parishahs, like the sayogi jinas, but they experience pain for only nine at a time.

Therefore, even here, through a comparative study of the Tattvarth Sutra and the Svetambara Agama literature, we reach the same conclusion that the Tattvarth Sutra author, while establishing the 'Ekadasha Jine' sutra, is closer to the Digambara tradition than the Svetambara tradition.

This is an examination of some sutras of the Tattvarth Sutra, which also helps us to decide that the Tattvarth Sutra author must be different from the commentator Umaswati.

However, there is no ancient mention in the Digambara tradition of any Acharya named Umaswati or Umaswami. The inscriptions of Shravanabelagola or any other evidence that is found is later than the mentions that declare the Tattvarth Sutra to be the work of Acharya Gaddapichchki. Therefore, firstly, their credibility in this matter cannot be trusted. Secondly, Gaddapichchki has been accepted as a name or in the form of an epithet.

## Sirseniya Commentary
Pandit Sukhlalji, in the introduction to his Tattvarth Sutra, has presented one or two mentions from the commentaries of Siddhasena Gani and Haribhadrasuri, trying to prove that the Tattvarth Sutra author and its commentator are the same person. But these mentions are doubtful. For example, in the commentary of Siddhasena Gani, at the end of the seventh chapter, the available pushpika mentions 'Umaswativachkopastrabhaadhye padako panditji bhaashyakar aur sutrakar ek vyakti hain', trying to prove that the commentator and the sutra author are the same person. But the direct meaning of this phrase is - the sutra commentary made by Umaswati Vachka. Here, the phrase 'Umaswativachkopajna' is related to the commentary, not the sutra. The second evidence presented by Panditji is from the Siddhaseniya commentary of the 22nd sutra of the 9th chapter. But this evidence is also doubtful, because the ancient copies of the Siddhasena Gani commentary available have the phrase 'krutatra sutrasanniveshamabhittyoktam' in place of 'swakrut sutrasanniveshamaashrittyoktam'. It is very possible that some scribe, with the intention of showing Umaswati as the commentator of the Tattvarth Sutra, corrected 'krutatra' to 'swakrut' and later this reading became established.

Generally, we have independently examined the Siddhasena Gani commentary, so on this basis, we accept that there are some mentions in it that, in the view of Siddhasena Gani, prove the Tattvarth Sutra and the Tattvarth Bhashya to be the work of the same person. The first mention is from the Siddhaseniya commentary of the sutra 'Ache Paroksham' of the first chapter. Here, Siddhasena Gani, while explaining the part 'vyakhya prajnaptti sha 8. 2', says:
1. Vyakhya Prajnaptti Sha 8. 2.
2. See the introduction of their Tattvarth Sutra, page 17, footnote 1.
3. See Siddhaseniya Commentary, Chapter 9, Sutra 22, page 253, footnote.

Page #76:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

"The author of the treatise, dividing himself into the Sutrakar and the Bhashyakar, says, 'Shaasti' - the Sutrakar is implied. From the synonym, there is a difference in the synonym. Another synonym is the Sutrakar, another is the Bhashyakar. Therefore, the Sutrakar synonym is 'Shaasti'."

It is stated that "the author of the treatise has divided himself into two parts, the Sutrakar and the Bhashyakar, and says 'Shaasti'." Therefore, here, to indicate the doer of the action 'Shaasti', the word 'Sutrakar' should be added. Or, the synonym should be considered different from the synonym. Therefore, the same author is different as the Sutrakar synonym and different as the Bhashyakar synonym. Therefore, the author should be considered as connected with the Sutrakar synonym.

A similar mention is found in the Siddhaseniya commentary on the 'Nirupabhoga Mantram' Sutra of Chapter Two. In it, the Sutrakar and the Bhashyakar are stated to be inseparable. The mention is as follows:

"Even though the Sutrakar is undivided, the Bhashyakar necessarily divides due to the reliance on the Vyuchchitti (synonym) Nayas."

Thus, although these mentions indicate that Siddhasena Gani considered the Tattvartha Sutrakar and the Tattvartha Bhashyakar to be one person, it cannot be assumed that this was his definite opinion. He has also expressed an opinion in his commentary, which, when considered, proves that the Sutrakar and the Bhashyakar are different. For this, one should see the commentary on the 'Matyaadi Maam' Sutra of Chapter Eight.

Here, the question before Siddhasena Gani is that when other Acharyas accept the 'Matibhutaavashimanahparyayakevalaamaam' Sutra, should the actual form of the Sutra be considered as 'Matyaadinaam', or should it be considered as the other Acharyas read it? While resolving this doubt, he first relied on the reasons, but seeing that he himself was not satisfied with this, he says that since the Bhashyakar has also interpreted this Sutra in the same way, therefore, 'Matyaadinaam' should be the Sutra. His commentary, which expresses the entire context, is as follows:

"Others read it again as 'Matibhutaavashimanahparyayakevalaanaam'. Thus, the Apakaapaatha is observed. Then, after that, the five divisions, Jnanaavaranadaya, are mentioned. And the creator himself has explained it in the first chapter. Therefore, the word 'Aadi' is also appropriate. The Bhashyakar also interprets the meaning of the Sutra in the same way."

Here, the words 'Bhashyakaro-' etc. are noteworthy. In this statement, the Bhashyakar is not directly connected with the creation of the 'Matyaadinaam' Sutra, but with its meaning. This proves that here, Siddhasena Gani considers the Sutrakar to be different from the Bhashyakar. Otherwise, he would have established the inseparability of the Sutrakar and the Bhashyakar from some perspective, and supported it through his language in such a way that it would firmly support the fact that the Sutrakar, who is inseparable from the Bhashyakar, has created the 'Matyaadinaam' Sutra.

As far as our opinion is concerned, based on these aforementioned mentions, we reach only this conclusion that the original Tattvartha Sutrakar and the Tattvartha Bhashyakar are different individuals. Siddhasena Gani's position on this matter has been doubtful, because sometimes he considers the Tattvartha Sutrakar and the Tattvartha Bhashyakar to be one person, and sometimes two. Looking at this situation, it seems that by the time of Siddhasena Gani, the belief that the Tattvartha Bhashyakar is the original Tattvartha Sutrakar had not become firmly rooted. This is the reason why Siddhasena Gani was unable to definitively present any one opinion.

Panditji - Thus, even though the commentary of Siddhasena Gani leaves the question of who is the author of the Tattvartha Sutra, Umaaswaati, unresolved, here we have to consider the evidence of Prajnaachakshu Pandit Sukhlalji on this subject.

Page #77:
---------------------------
## Introduction

It appears necessary to consult. The three arguments they presented on this subject, we have already referred to on page 62. The first argument is the eulogy found at the end of the 22nd Karika of the Uttanika and the Tattvarthabhashya. Of these two places, the Uttanika Karika promises to speak of a short treatise called Tattvarthadhigam, and in the final eulogy, the commentator Umashvati says that he composed the Tattvarthadhigam Shastra. Based on this, the scholar wants to prove that the author of the Tattvarthsutra is the commentator Umashvati. But we have already proven and explained this earlier (on page 17) that the name Tattvarthadhigam does not belong to the Tattvarthsutra but to the Tattvarthabhashya. Umashvati himself does not call the Tattvarthadhigam a Sutra but addresses it as a Granth or Shastra, and further, while explaining the purpose of composing the Tattvarthadhigam, he says in the 22nd Uttanika Karika that it is difficult to understand the ocean of words, the inaccessible Granthabhashya. It is not hidden from historians that the commentaries on the Agam texts mentioned here by Umashvati were composed in the 7th century Vikram. While even before these, many commentaries like Sarvarth Siddhi were written on the Tattvarthsutra. In such a situation, it makes no sense to prove Umashvati as the author of the original Tattvarthsutra based on the 21st Uttanika Karika and the final eulogy.

The scholar's second argument states that the study of the Tattvarthabhashya suggests that there is no contradiction in interpreting the Sutra in the Tattvarthabhashya, etc. Here, the point is to consider whether the Tattvarthabhashya is in the state as the scholar proclaims or not. From this perspective, we have also studied the Tattvarthabhashya, but we find many places in it that make the situation of the Tattvarthabhashya questionable from this perspective. For example:

1. In the Tattvarthsutra, Samyagdarshani and Samyagdristi are not considered different. There, in Chapter 7 Sutra 23, even someone who has Samyagdarshan is called Samyagdristi, who is susceptible to doubts and other defects. But contrary to this, in the Tattvarthabhashya, independent explanations of both Samyagdarshani and Samyagdristi are given, making them different from each other. It is said there that one who has Abhinibodhik knowledge is called Samyagdarshani, and one who has Kevalgyan is called Samyagdristi. It is clear that here, the commentator of the Tattvarthabhashya does not follow the Tattvarthsutra and presents his two interpretations of the term Samyagdristi, contrary to the Tattvarthsutra. In one place (Chapter 1 Sutra 8), he accepts something, and in another (Chapter 7 Sutra 23), he abandons it.

2. In the Tattvarthsutra, Mati, Smriti, and Sanjna, etc., are synonymous names for Matijnana. But the commentator of the Tattvarthabhashya, instead of considering them synonymous names, considers Matijnana, Smritijnana, etc., as independent knowledge based on the Sutra "Matih Smritih" etc. Siddhasena Divakara also explained them as independent knowledge based on the Tattvarthabhashya. To say that general Matijnana is comprehensive and special Matijnana, Smritijnana, etc., are its objects, does not seem logical, because Matijnana deals with the present meaning. When the commentator himself accepts this fact, in such a situation, Mati, Smriti, etc., can only be synonymous names for Matijnana, not different knowledge. And in the Agamas of the Digambara and Svetambara traditions, they are considered synonymous with Matijnana.

1. See Uttanika Karika 21 and the final eulogy of the Tattvarthabhashya. 2. Mahato'timahaviṣayasya durgamagranthabhāṣyapārasya. Kaḥ śakto pratyāsaṁ jinavacanamahaudadheḥ kartum. 3. See the introduction of the Tattvarthsutra by Pandit Kailashchandraji, page 121. 4. See the Tattvarthabhashya of Chapter 1 Sutra 8. 5. See the Tattvarthabhashya of Chapter 1 Sutra 13.

Page #78:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

This is a synonym. It is clear that here too, the commentary of the Tattvarthabhashyakara does not follow the original sutra.

3. The Tattvarthabhashyakara, while explaining the sutra "Kshetrakalagati" in chapter 10, has considered "Shabda", "Samabhirudha" and "Evambhuta" as the three fundamental Nayas, whereas he himself accepts these three in the first chapter in the sutra text where only one Shabdnaya is accepted as the fundamental Naya. Clearly, his acceptance of three Nayas like Shabda etc. as fundamental in the 10th chapter and acceptance of one Shabdnaya as fundamental in the first chapter is contradictory.

4. The Shvetambar Tattvarthsutra, chapter 2, sutra 52, accepts the text "Charamvehottamapurusha". The Tattvarthabhashyakara initially accepted this term and explained it. But later, he abandons the term "Usmapurusha" and accepts only the term "Paramveha" and concludes with it. This shows that the Tattvarthabhashyakara must have received two texts of this sutra with some variations. He initially explained one text considering it as the main one. But seeing the objections that arise from accepting it, he accepted the other text at the time of conclusion. It is clear that this greatly undermines the belief that the Tattvarthabhashyakara is the author of the Tattvarthsutra.

5. The Tattvarthsutra, chapter 4, sutra 4, lists 10 categories of each Devanikaya, including Indra. But the Tattvarthabhashyakara, along with these ten categories, also accepts an eleventh category called "Anikadhipati". Similarly, in the 26th sutra of the same chapter, nine categories of Laukantika Devas are listed, including Sarasvata, but the Tattvarthabhashyakara accepts only eight categories in his commentary instead of nine. He says, "These Sarasvata etc. eight types of Devas are in the Brahma Loka, in the east, north, etc., in a clockwise direction, as per their number."

These are the evidences that go against the aforementioned belief of the scholar. It is clear that even on the basis of the scholar's aforementioned belief, the Tattvarthabhashyakara cannot be considered the author of the Tattvarthsutra.

The third belief of Pandit Sukhlalji is that in the initial karikas and in some places in the commentary, there are references to first-person verbs like "Vakyami, Vakyamha" etc., therefore, the Tattvarthsutrakar and the Tattvarthabhashyakara are the same person. But this is not a strong argument of the scholar. Often commentators use such verbs to establish identity with the original author. For example, see the commentary on Sarvarthasiddhi of chapter 1, sutra 1, the Uthanika "Tattvarthavatika" of chapter 8, sutra 1, the commentary of Haribhadra on chapter 8, sutra 1, and the Uthanika of Siddhasena Ganika on chapter 10, sutra 1. Here Siddhasena Ganika says, "Now the result of that is Moksha, we will explain it." "Only knowledge arises, it never was, is, or will be without it, therefore, we will explain only the origin of knowledge." Therefore, even on this basis, the Tattvarthabhashyakara, Uma Swami, cannot be proved to be the author of the Tattvarthsutra.

Shvetambar Pattavalis - Looking at the Shvetambar Pattavalis also confirms this situation. The oldest among them are the Kalpasutra Staviravali and the Nandisutr Pattavali. But they do not mention the time. Time calculation is in the later Pattavalis. It is said that the Nandisutr Pattavali was compiled in 510 VS. They do not mention the names of Uma Swami and his gurus.

1. Shabdadayasch Trayah. 2. Pandit Lal Bahadurji Shastri has published an article titled "What is the commentary self-known and its author Yapaneya" in Jain Siddhant Bhaskar, Part 13, Kiran 1. It also sheds light on this subject. 3. We will explain the nature of these in detail in the future, in terms of their characteristics and regulations. 4. We will explain the bondage that has been obtained. 5. "Bandha" is present. We will explain this further above.

Page #79:
---------------------------
## Introduction

One of the Pattavalis (genealogical lists) compiled in the past is the Dharmaghosha Suri Krit Dushma Kaal Shraman Sangh Stava. Its composition is estimated to have taken place in the 13th century Vikram Samvat. In this, the name of Umaswati comes after Haribhadra and Jinabhadra, but Haribhadra has written a commentary on Umaswati's Tattvarthabhashya. These are scholars of the 8th-9th century Vikram Samvat, therefore, from the perspective of the chronological order of the Acharyas, this Pattavali cannot be considered a special proof. In this, the position of the commentator Umaswati in 720 Vikram Samvat has been accepted.

The Tapa Gachchha Pattavali, compiled by Dharmasagar Gani, was written in 1646 Vikram Samvat. In this, after mentioning Jinabhadra, Vibhudh Prabha, Jayanand, and Raviprabha, the name of Umaswati is mentioned and his time is stated as 720 Vikram Samvat. Although he has mentioned Umaswati as a disciple of Balissah, one of the two disciples of Aryamahagiri, namely Bahul and Balissah, and has considered the possibility of this first Umaswati being the author of the Tattvarth Sutra. But this possibility of his is misleading. Because in the 26th verse of the Nandisutra Pattavali, the word 'Hariyagatam Savam' comes. In which there is a mention of Swati of the Harit Gotra. It seems that Dharmasagar Gani, seeing the partial similarity in the name, has mistakenly suspected him to be the author of the Tattvarth Sutra in the second place. Pandit Sukhlalji has also declared this suspicion to be misleading.

Vinayavijaya Gani completed his Lokaprakash in 1708 Vikram Samvat. He considers Umaswati to be a Yuga Pradhan Acharya and accepts his position between Jinabhadra and Pushpamitra. He has not mentioned the time of Umaswati in his Pattavali.

Ravivardhan Gani (1739 Vikram Samvat) has also mentioned Umaswati in Pattavali Saroddhara. While mentioning the time in it, the actual time Veer Ni. Samvat 1190 (Vikram Samvat 720) has been accepted.

These are the Pattavalis of the Shwetambar tradition in which Umaswati is mentioned. Although these Pattavalis are relatively modern and there are some differences in them, it is not appropriate to consider them completely baseless. Based on the things mentioned in them, the following facts are derived:

1. The commentator Umaswati was a Yuga Pradhan Acharya. He lived around 720 Vikram Samvat. It is very likely that for this reason, there is no mention of his tradition in the Nandisutra Pattavali and the Kalpasutra Sthiravali.

2. Although Ravivardhan Gani has mentioned the commentator Umaswati before Jinabhadra Gani, but from the point of view of time, Ravivardhan Gani has stated him to be after Jinabhadra Gani, therefore, considering the actual time accepted unanimously in all the above Pattavalis, in the light of other evidence, it seems more likely that he lived after Jinabhadra Gani.

3. A eulogy is also available at the end of the Tattvarthabhashya in which the commentator Umaswati has called himself the author of the Tattvarthadhigam Shastra. But since there is no mention of time etc. in it, this eulogy seems to be only supplementary to the aforementioned facts related to time.

We have already accepted this on the basis of many proofs that the commentator Umaswati composed the Tattvarthabhashya and gave the final form to the text of the Tattvarth Sutra accepted in the Tattvarthabhashya, therefore, even after accepting these facts in this form, the commentator Umaswati is the author of the original Tattvarth Sutra.

1. See their Tattvarth Sutra introduction page 2. 2. All four Pattavalis are printed in the first part of Shri Pattavali Samucchya edited by Muni Darshan Vijay.

Page #80:
---------------------------
## 10. Sarvarthasiddhi

It is not unreasonable to believe that the Sarvarthasiddhi commentary on the Tattvarthasutra was written before the 8th century Vikram era, perhaps in the early 6th century or even earlier, as many commentaries and annotations were already in circulation.

Although Dharmasagargani, a disciple of Balissah, doubts that Swati composed the Tattvarthasutra, this is not his definitive opinion. It is merely a possibility. As he states in his words, "Balissah's disciple Swati is considered to have composed the Tattvartha and other works." Therefore, this cannot be given much importance.

We have reviewed five opinions so far. Only one major opinion remains, which needs to be considered from three perspectives: name, tradition, and time.

We have already mentioned in the beginning, with citations, that Acharya Virasen, Acharya Vidyānanda, and Acharya Vadiraj declare Acharya Gṛddhapichchha as the author of the Tattvarthasutra. These mentions are relatively ancient. However, apart from these mentions, all other mentions found in the Digambara tradition show a variety of names, considering Gṛddhapichchha as a secondary or another name. We have already mentioned some of these prominent mentions under the heading "Other Opinions."

Similarly, there is a prominent opinion based on the Nandisangh's lineage. Two lineages of Nandisangh are available: one in Sanskrit and the other in Prakrit. The Sanskrit lineage states that Acharya Umaswati is the author of the Tattvarthasutra.

Here, we need to consider why there is so much disagreement about the author's name and what his real name is.

We have already presented the citations from inscriptions 105 and 108 found in Shravanabelagola. They are estimated to be from the years 1320 and 1355 of the Saka era. Two other inscriptions from the years 1037 and 1085 of the Saka era are also available there, which are listed as numbers 47 and 40 in the Jain inscription collection, volume 1. Inscription number 47 states:

"In the lineage of Shri Gautam Ganadhar, the prominent Acharya Padmanandi of the Nandisangh, whose other name was Kondakunda, existed. Then, in his lineage, Acharya Umaswati, whose other name was Gṛddhapichchha, existed. His disciple was Balakapichchha, and Balakapichchha's disciple was Gunanand."

Inscription number 40 states:

"After Gautam Ganadhar, the fifth Shrutakevali, Bhadrabah, and his disciple Chandragupta existed. After them, in their lineage, Padmanandi existed. His other name was Kondakunda. Then, in his lineage, Acharya Gṛddhapichchha Umaswati existed. His disciple was Balakapichchha. Thus, in the lineage of great Acharyas, Acharya Samantabhadra existed."

Inscriptions 105 and 108, which we have already mentioned, say almost the same thing. The only difference is that these two inscriptions mention Gṛddhapichchha Umaswati as the author of the Tattvarthasutra, while inscriptions 47 and 40 do not mention him as the author.

Here, we want to present the lineage based on the aforementioned mentions of the Digambara tradition, the praise inscription found at the end of the Tattvarthabhashya, and the Tapagachchha lineage written by Dharmasagargani. As follows:

Page #81:
---------------------------
## Introduction
**Inscription (Chandragiri)**
**Gautama Ganadhara**
**Tattvarthabhashya Pro. Vacakamukhya Shivashri**
**Tapagachch Pattavali Jinabhadragani**
**Bhadrabahu (Anvayamen)**
**Ghoshanandi Ksaman**
**Vibudhprabh**
**Chandragupta (Shishya)**
**Vacak Umaswati**
**Jayanand**
**Padmanandi (Anvayamen)**
**Raviprabh**
**Gṛpiच्छ Umaswati (Anyayamen)**
**Umaswati**
**Balakapiच्छ Shishya**

Thus, these three traditions are before us. Regarding the Tapagachch Pattavali, it is only to be said that in the presence of Dharmasagar Gani, while praising the Tattvarthabhashya, he mentioned Umaswati along with the tradition of Tapagachch Acharyas. The reason for this is only to accept Umaswati as a Yuga Pradhan Acharya along with his actual time. The same is true for Jinabhadra Gani. Both of them are not the Acharyas of the Tapagachch tradition, nor does Dharmasagar Gani believe so. This is the reason why he has mentioned them only as Yuga Pradhan Acharyas while giving a separate direction to the Tapagachch tradition. Therefore, leaving this and other praises found with slight differences, two main traditions remain before us - one is the tradition of inscriptions found in Shravanabelagola and the other is the tradition of praise found at the end of the Tattvarthabhashya.

It is evident from observation that not only are the Guruparamparas different in both these mentions, but also their Upapadas or names are different. While the tradition of inscriptions of Shravanabelagola declares the Tattvarthsutrakar as Gṛpiच्छ Umaswati, the praise of Tattvarthabhashya addresses him as Vacak Umaswati. Therefore, on these grounds, our belief is firm that Gṛpiच्छ Umaswati and Vacak Umaswati must be different Acharyas.

_Thus, after proving these two Acharyas to be different through this much discussion, it is to be seen here how much truth is there in the name Gṛpiच्छ Umaswati, because we find many kinds of mentions regarding this name. Sometimes he is called only Gṛpiच्छ and sometimes he is called Umaswami or Umaswati with the Upapada Gṛddhpiच्छ. Sometimes Gṛddhpiच्छ is said to be another name of Umaswati, and sometimes only the name Umaswati comes. Although these names seem different at first glance, like the name Umaswami is different from Umaswati. It can be said here that one of these names must have been there first and later 'm' in the place of 'n'._

1. In the context of the description of Anvayavali in Jinendra Kalyanaabhyudaya, there is a verse in which both Kundakunda Acharya and Umaswati are called Vacak. And by looking at the last part of the Dhavala Tika, it is also known that the Upapada 'Vacak' was used in the Digambar tradition. But the evidence of Jinendra Kalyanaabhyudaya is relatively very recent and on this basis alone, Vacak Umaswati of Tattvarthabhashya and Gṛpiच्छ Umaswati of Shravanabelagola inscriptions cannot be considered one. See the letter of Pandit Jugalkishorji Mukhtar quoted in the appendix of the introduction of Tattvarthsutra by Pandit Sukhlalji.

Page #82:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

The names might have come into circulation because 'm' was written in place of 't' or 't'. Similarly, the mention of a Gṛddhapiṭṭha named Umāsvāti or Umāsvābhī somewhere with the other Nāga, and the mention of one of them somewhere else, suggests that there was a tradition of writing complete or incomplete names, and it is possible that these names came to be mentioned in various ways according to that tradition.

We accept the truth of these arguments. However, the question is how did a single scripture come to be associated with both an Ācārya Nandiśaṅgha and Kundakunda, who belonged to different traditions and lived at different times? It is not possible to say that the commentator Umāsvāti of the Śvetāmbara tradition saw this name and adopted it as his own, because the Pattavalis and other evidence show that Gṛddhapiṭṭha came after Ācārya Kundakunda, while the commentator Umāsvāti lived much later. It is also not possible to say that Gṛddhapiṭṭha Umāsvāti saw this name and adopted it as his own, because the eulogy at the end of the Tattvārthabhāṣya gives the reason for the commentator Umāsvāti's name. It states that his father's name was 'Svāti', and Siddhasena Gaṇini, while explaining this eulogy, also writes that his mother's name was 'Umā'. Therefore, his name is Umāsvāti. It cannot be said that this eulogy was fabricated later, because the commentator Siddhasena Gaṇini not only mentions it but also explains it, thereby making it a part of the Tattvārthabhāṣya. In this regard, we agree with the opinion of Paṇḍit Sukhlālji that this is the work of the commentator Umāsvāti himself.

In this context, we would like to point out that most scholars, when they do not find their opinion supported by a eulogy, Pattavali, inscription, etc., declare it to be completely unauthentic or forged. However, this tendency cannot be called thoughtful. Because in ancient times, the means of compiling history were often limited. Most historians had to rely on storytellers, and they recorded what they knew from authentic sources. Therefore, it is possible that a name, time, or event may have been recorded correctly in one inscription, etc., and in another inscription, etc., it may have been recorded in a corrupted form. However, it is certain that, except for mentions made out of sectarian bias, the intention of the recorder was not to deliberately corrupt it. The famous author of the Dhavala commentary, Ācārya Vīrasena, has presented a very good line of thought in this regard. He received one opinion that the age of Bhagavān Mahāvīra was 72 years, and another opinion that the age of Bhagavān Mahāvīra was 71 years, 3 months, and 25 days. Therefore, he was faced with the question of which one to consider as evidence? In response to this question, what he writes is not only heart-touching but also worthy of emulation. He says, "I, Vīrasena, the disciple of the Ācārya, do not open my mouth on the subject of which of these two is right and which is wrong, because there is no obstacle to accepting either of them. But one of these two must be correct, so one should find it and state it."

1. 'Kauvhiṣaṇinā Svātitanayena-'. 2. Vātsīsute neti gotreṇa nāmnā Ume ti māturākhyānam. 3. See Paṇḍit Sukhlālji's introduction to the Tattvārthসূত্র, p. 4. 4. Jayadhavala, book 1, p. 81.

Page #83:
---------------------------
## Introduction

While it is appropriate to give prominence to what appears correct based on proper grounds, it is not right to attempt to declare one as completely false and the other as completely true.

This relevant statement makes it clear that the inscriptions and quotations found in the Digambara tradition regarding the Tattvartha Sutra are also ordinary, and the mentions found in the Svetambara tradition are also ordinary. Therefore, it is not our task to declare one authentic and the other inauthentic, but only to clarify their position in the light of other evidence. And in carrying out this task, based on the facts expressed at various places in the introduction, we have reached the conclusion that the name of the author of the Tattvarthaadhigama Shastra in the Svetambara tradition is indeed Vaachka Umaswati, but those who initially composed the Tattvartha Sutra and who belonged to the Acharya Kundakunda tradition, their name is not Giddhapiccha Umaswati, Grippiccha Umaswami, Umaswati or Umaswami, but simply Giddhapicchaacharya.

The mentions that express the fact that the author of the Tattvartha Sutra is Giddhapicchaacharya are from the 9th century. And around the same time, this belief seems to have become prevalent in the Svetambara tradition as well, as is evident from some questionable mentions of Siddhasena Ganika, that the author of the Tattvarthabhashya, Vaachka Umaswati, is also the author of the Tattvartha Sutra. Therefore, it appears that these two beliefs together gave birth to a new belief, and in later times, Giddhapiccha and Umaswati, these two independent names of two Acharyas, merged into one name, and later on, the author of the Tattvartha Sutra came to be referred to as Giddhapiccha Umaswati. This is the reason why we see the use of these names or the name Umaswati with Grippiccha as a suffix for one Acharya in the inscriptions of Shravanabelgola or elsewhere.

This view that the author of the Tattvartha Sutra should be Giddhapicchaacharya and Vaachka Umaswati is different from him, can be expressed briefly by these facts:

1. The association of Acharya Giddhapiccha's name with the composition of the Tattvartha Sutra cannot be without reason.
2. Acharya Vira Sena, Vidyānanda and Vadiraj have expressed the name of the author of the Tattvartha Sutra as Giddhapicchaacharya, and these mentions are older than other evidence.
3. In the Svetambara tradition, the name of the Acharya who authored the Tattvarthabhashya is Vaachka Umaswati, not Giddhapiccha Umaswati. Therefore, it appears that the name Giddhapiccha Umaswati is a combination of the two names Giddhapiccha and Umaswati.
4. Giddhapicchaacharya belonged to the lineage of Acharya Kundakunda, and the lineage of Umaswati is different, therefore, they must be two independent Acharyas, not one.
5. There is a big difference in the time of existence of both Giddhapicchaacharya and Vaachka Umaswati, therefore, they cannot be one.

## Tradition

Based on the above decision regarding the name, much of the controversy regarding which tradition the author of the Tattvartha Sutra belonged to is resolved, because based on the evidence that establishes his name as Acharya Giddhapiccha, he is only a Digambara. Whether he was a direct disciple of Acharya Kundakunda or not, he belonged to his lineage, this is proven by the lineage mentioned earlier and other evidence. This verse appears in the Panchaastikaya of Acharya Kundakunda:

1. Jayadhwala Book 1 Page 811

Page #84:
---------------------------
74
Sarvarthasiddhi
"We are those who are born, exist, and perish, and are united with the characteristics of the soul. They are the beings who are truly righteous, or they are those who are united with the characteristics of the soul."
Now, in the light of this verse, see these sutras from the Tattvarthasutra:
Sad dravyalakshanam || 5, 29 || Utpadavyaya shrivyayuktam sat || 5, 30 || Gunaparyayavad dravyam || 5, 30 ||
There are many such sayings in which the use of words like "nathaya" has been made in the sayings of Acharya Kundakunda and in the Tattvarthasutra.
Apart from this, there is also a verbal and objective similarity in the principles, which proves that its author belongs to the Digambara tradition.
The question of the time of Acharya Guddhapichcha, who is known by the same name as time, is also very much worth considering. Generally, the mention of days sheds direct light on their time. There are two such mentions before us. First, the mention of the Nandisangh's lineage, and second, the mention of their time quoted in the Vajan Bodhak. 1. The Nandisangh's lineage begins with the coronation of Vikrama, and it is quoted in the form in which it is quoted in Jain Siddhanta Bhaskar Kiran, 4, p. 78, based on Indian Antiquary, its initial part is as follows:
"Bhadrabahu II (4) 2 Guptigupta (26) 3 Mamnandi (36) 4 Jinachand (40) 5 Kundakunda Acharya (49) 6 Umaswami (101) 7 Lohacharya (142) 8 Yash: Kirti (153) 9 Yashonandi (211) 10 Devanandi (258) 11 Jayanandi (308) 12 Gunanandi (358) 13 Vajranandi (364) 14 Kumaranandi (386) 15 Lokachand (427) 16 Prabhachandra (453) 17 Nemichandra (478) 18 Bhanunandi (487) 19 Hinndi (508) 20 Shri Vasunandi (525) 21 Viranandi (531) 22 Ratnanandi (561) 23 Manikyanandi (585) 24 Meghchandra (601) 25 Shantikirti (627) 26 Merukiti (642)."
Guptigupta is the second name of Aham Balika. He was the first Pattadhar Acharya of the Nandisangh, which he established along with other sanghs. According to this, Umaswami (Guddhapichcha) is the fourth Acharya to sit on the throne of the Nandisangh. Although they are mentioned at number 6 in the lineage, the count of the Acharyas of the Nandisangh should be done only after excluding Bhadrabahu II and Adbalika. Therefore, we have mentioned the number of Umaswami (Pichcha) as 4. According to this lineage, he lived in 571 VE.
2. This verse is quoted in the Vidvajjan Bodhak:
"Varshasaptashatechaiva saptatyacha vismritau | Umaswamimunirmaatah Kundakundastatheva cha ||"
This means that Umaswami Muni lived in 770 VE, and at the same time, Acharya Kundakunda
Now let us see other evidence.
1. In the Shrutavatar of Indranandi, the lineage of the Shruta Dhar Acharyas for the first 683 years is given. And after this, the names of Vinamdhara Shridatta and Arhat, who were one-part holders of Angapurva, are mentioned, and the establishment of the Nandisangh and other sanghs is mentioned.
1. See Tattvarthasutra, A. 9, S. 9 || 2. Shubhachandra, the author of the Pandavapurana, has given his lineage. In it too, this order is accepted up to 10 Acharyas. And even further, except for one or two names, there is similarity in the names of the Acharyas. They declare themselves to be of the Nandisangh. See Janasiddhanta Bhaskar, Part 1, Kiran 4, p. 51.

Page #85:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The name of the author of the Ahelika is mentioned, followed by Maghanandi, Earsen Pushpadanta, and Bhootbalika. After this, the name of Acharya Kundakunda appears in the Acharya tradition. It is certain that Acharya Ddhipichchh came after Acharya Kundakunda. Therefore, if we consider this and add approximately 100 years for the Acharyas who came in the 683 years of the Shruthdhara Acharyas, then it can be said that Ddhipichchh lived around 783 years after the Veer Ni. Sa.

## Acharya

2. In the inscription number 105 of Shravanabelagola, the tradition of the Bhog Ghar Anayaki is mentioned, followed by the names of Kumbh, Vineet, Haldhar Vasudev, Achal, Merudheer, Sarvash, Sarvagupt, Mahidhar, Dhanpal, Mahavir, and Veer. After this, the name of Kundakunda and the author of the Tattvarth Sutra, Umashwatika, appears. However, this inscription does not mention the time period of the Bhootdhara Acharyas. Secondly, it does not consider the names of the Shruthdhara and other Acharyas. Therefore, nothing can be inferred about the time of the Acharya Ddhipichchh based on this inscription.

3. The tradition of the Shruthdhara Acharyas is also mentioned in the Dharna, Adipurana, the Prakrit Pattavali of the Nandisangha, and the Trilokpragyapti. However, they are limited to mentioning the 683-year tradition. Therefore, it is difficult to reach any conclusion based on these sources. Based on these sources, it cannot be said what the opinion of these Acharyas is regarding the time of Acharya Grichchh. Without knowing their opinion in this regard, we are not ready to accept the position of Acharya Ddhipichchh after the 683-year tradition of the Shruthdharis based solely on the Shrutavatar of Indranandi, according to the opinion of these Acharyas.

Thus, from the above discussion, three main opinions emerge, which provide information about the time of Acharya Sachchhik. Firstly, according to the Pattavali of the Nandisangha, his time is Vikrama (571-470) 101. Secondly, according to the verse quoted by the scholars Bodhak, his time is Vikrama (770-470) 300. And thirdly, according to the Thutavatar of Dandranandi, it can be estimated as Vikrama (783-470) 313.

In the inscriptions of Shravanabelagola, the name of Acharya Balakapichchh appears as the successor of Acharya Vrudhhipichchh. And this is the solution that has been accepted. In the Sindhi Pattavali, the name of Lohaacharya appears in place of Balakapichchh. However, it is possible that the Pattavali mentions the names of those Acharyas who came after them. It is possible that the Pattavali mentions the names of their prominent disciples. Even if we accept this Pattavali as correct, the difference between the time mentioned in the Pattavali and the time mentioned in other sources regarding their time is a matter of consideration.

Here, we will not delve into the opinions of other Eastern and Western scholars, as they have mostly based their opinions on the Tattvarth Sutra and the Tattvarth Bhashya. However, we would like to present the opinion of Dr. A.N. Upadhye, which is a well-considered opinion. After much deliberation, he has stated his opinion regarding the time of Acharya Kundakunda. However, according to the Nandisangha Pattavali and other evidence, Acharya Gudhpihchchh was a disciple of Acharya Kundakunda. Therefore, this...

1. See Jain Shilalekh Sangrah, Part 1, published by Manikchand Granthamala, page 195 etc.
2. See Dhavala, page 9, page 130
3. See Adipurana, Parva 2, Shloka 137 etc.
4. See Jain Siddhant Bhaskar Kiran 4, page 71
5. See Trilokpragyapti, Mahaadhikaran 4, Gatha 1490, 1491
6. See Jain Shilalekh Sangrah, Part 1, published by Bha. Pra. Ma., inscription numbers 40, 42, and 50 etc.

Page #86:
---------------------------
## 76
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

Light is shed on all aspects of the time period. After considering all the opinions and views of scholars, the conclusion they have reached is:

"After such a long discussion, we arrive at the fact that, according to tradition, the time period of Acharya Kundakunda falls between the middle of the 1st century BCE and the middle of the 1st century CE. The Shatkhandagama was written before the middle of the 2nd century CE, so from this perspective, his time period falls around the middle of the 2nd century CE. According to the Tamrapatra of Merkara, the final limit of Acharya Kundakunda can be considered to be before the middle of the 3rd century CE. Along with this, he was perhaps contemporary with King Shivascanda and the author of Kural. This suggests that Acharya Kundakunda lived in the first two centuries mentioned above. Considering all of this, I have reached the conclusion that Kundakunda lived in the 1st century CE."

This is the fact that Dr. A.N. Upadhye has stated regarding the time of Acharya Kundakunda. The time limit mentioned in the Nandisingha Pattavali is almost the same, so considering all these bases, it can be said that Acharya Gṛddhapichcha must have lived after Acharya Kundakunda, who lived in the 1st century CE, because his name appears after Acharya Kundakunda in the Pattavalis and other inscriptions, and it is possible that there was a Guru-Shishya relationship between the two. It is clear from the Nandisingha Pattavali that he is the successor of Acharya Kundakunda.

5. **The reason for the creation of the Tattvarthasutra:** It is a well-known story in the world that a certain Bhavya, considering the creation of a scripture useful for the path of liberation, wrote the sutra "Darshanashancharitrani Mokshamārgaḥ" on a wall. After that, he went out for work, and Gṛddhapichcha Acharya came there for his daily routine. Seeing the sutra written on the wall incomplete, he added the word "Samyak" at the beginning. When that Bhavya returned from outside and saw the word "Samyak" added at the beginning of the sutra, he was surprised. He asked the members of his household about the reason, and knowing the true reason, he went searching for Gṛddhapichcha Acharya and expressed his opinion to him, requesting him to write the scripture. Accordingly, the Acharya Maharaj composed the Tattvarthasutra.

Here, we need to see how this story became prevalent in the world. Is there any reliable basis for its authenticity, or is it merely the emotional outburst of devotees inspired by pure sentimentality? This fact is considered in detail further.

1. Shruta Sagar Suri has written in the beginning of his Tattvarthavritti that once Acharya Umaswami (Gṛddhapichcha) was sitting in his ashram. At that time, a Bhavya named Dvaiyak came there and asked him, "O Bhagavan! What is beneficial for us?" Upon the Bhavya asking this question, the Acharya replied auspiciously, "Moksha." Hearing this, Dvaiyak asked again, "What is its nature, and what is the means of attaining it?" In response, he explained the nature of Moksha, saying that although the nature of Moksha is like this, people who are prone to delusion perceive it in a different way. Not only that, but they also argue about its path. Some consider knowledge without conduct to be the path to liberation, some consider mere faith to be the path to liberation, and some consider conduct without knowledge to be the path to liberation.

1. Based on the preface of Pravachansara, page 22. 2. The basis of this story is known from the Kannada commentary on the Tattvarthasutra written by Balachandra Muni in the 13th century. In it, the name of the Shravaka is given as Siddhayya. See the preface of the Tattvarthasutra by Pandit Kailashchandraji, page 16.

Page #87:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The path to liberation (moksha) is considered to be the ultimate goal. However, just as a disease cannot be cured by mere knowledge, observation, or application of medicine, liberation cannot be attained by mere faith, knowledge, or conduct alone. When a devotee (bhavya) asked how liberation could be attained, the Acharya (teacher) responded with the sutra (aphorism): "Samyagdarshanashanacharitrani mokshamarghah" (Right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct are the path to liberation). This sutra became the foundation for the Tattvarth Sutra.

## The Origin of the Tattvarth Sutra

The same introductory verse is found in both the Sarvarthasiddhi and the Tattvarthavartika. Shruta Sagar Suri adopted this verse from the Sarvarthasiddhi. The only difference is that the devotee who approached the Acharya is referred to as "Kachid Bhavya" in the Sarvarthasiddhi, while Shruta Sagar Suri mentions his name. It is unclear from what sources he obtained this name.

These references from renowned commentaries on the Tattvarth Sutra support the popular belief that the Tattvarth Sutra was composed at the request of a devotee. However, it is unknown whether the devotee first composed the sutra "Darshanajnanacharitrani" and later, at the devotee's request, the sutrakar (author of the sutra) revised it into the Tattvarth Sutra. Therefore, while these references do not fully support the entire story, they do provide some basis for believing it to be partially true.

## Acharya Pujyapada

Acharya Pujyapada is a prominent figure in the great Indian tradition of Tattvadrashta (those who have realized the truth) scholars. He was blessed with both brilliance and scholarship. In the Jain tradition, after Acharya Samantabhadra and Acharya Siddhasena, the author of Sanmati, if anyone can be placed on a high pedestal in the literary world, it is Acharya Pujyapada. The influence of his literary legacy is evident in both the Digambara and Svetambara traditions. This is why many later writers and historians have acknowledged his importance, scholarship, and versatility, offering him their reverence.

Acharya Jinesena, the author of the Adi Purana, considers him a Tirthankara (liberated being) among poets and praises him, saying:

"Kavinaam Tirthakadevah Kintaram Tatra Varnate |
Vidushan Vaangmaladhvansi Ti Yasy Vachomaya ||1,52||"

Who can praise Devnandi Acharya, who was like a Tirthankara among poets and whose words, like a holy pilgrimage, cleanse the impurities of the words of scholars?

We will discuss later how he illuminated the path to liberation through his unparalleled works. He also contributed to the field of linguistics. It is even said that he explored the subject of anatomy, a field of practical use to society. This is why Acharya Shubhachandra, the author of Gyanarnava, acknowledges his qualities, saying:

"Apakuर्वन्ति यहाचः कायवाञ्चित्तसम्भवम् ।।
Kalamaninaam So'yam Devanandi Mamasyate ||1,15||"

I bow to Devnandi Acharya, whose teachings are capable of removing all impurities from the body, speech, and mind of beings.

Acharya Gunanandi, relying on his grammatical sutras, composed the Jainendra Prakriya. He begins his work with a salutation:

"Mamah Bhi Pujyapadaaya Lakshanam Yapakam |
Yadevaatra Tabanyatra Pamnaanasti Na Tattvchit ||"

My salutations to Pujyapada, whose teachings are comprehensive. Whatever is found here is also found elsewhere, and whatever is not found here is not true.

Page #88:
---------------------------
## 18
**Sarvartha Siddhi**

I bow to the revered Acharya Pujyapada, the author of the Lakshanashastra. The importance of this Lakshanashastra is evident from the fact that whatever is contained in it is found elsewhere, and whatever is not in it is not found elsewhere.

The tradition of praising him and his literature is not uniform. There have been many Acharyas like Dhananjaya, Vadiraja, Bhattaraka Shubhachandra, and Padma Prabha, who have followed in the footsteps of their predecessors to preserve this tradition of the Muni. The implication is that Acharya Pujyapada was a radiant sun in the world of literature, who would never perish, and whose rays would illuminate all directions forever.

These are the Acharya Pujyapada, the author of the present commentary on the Tattvarthasutra, Sarvartha Siddhi, whose complete introduction we have to obtain here. In it, we need to consider his full name, the sect he was the head of, his life history, his works, and his real work, and the guru-shishya tradition, etc. We will begin by introducing these topics one by one. First, let's take the name.

2. It is known from the inscriptions and other evidence that his initiation name given by his guru was Devanandi. Due to his sharp intellect, he was called Jinendra Buddhi, and his feet were worshipped by the gods, so he was also known in the world as Pujyapada. The following are the quotations that express this meaning:

> "Praagabhyadhaayi gurunaa kil vanandi buddhya punavipulyaa sa minendrabuddhih. Shree pujyapaada iti cha sha budhai: prachalye satyamita pavayuge vanadevataabhih."

> (Shravanabelagola Shi. No. 105, Vi. Sa. 13201)

See another inscription No. 108 from the same place, which expresses the significance of the names Pujyapada and Jinendra Buddhi:

> "Shreepaadodakshtadharmarajyastatah suraabishwarapujyapaadah. Yadiyadrushyagunaanivani badanti shaastrani tadashtaani."

> "Putavishvabuddhirayamatrayogihibh krta krtyabhava manavibhrayucchakai. Jinayad babhuva yavanangachapahrits jinendrabudsiriti saavarnitah."

> (Both these verses are from the inscription of Vi. Sa. 1355.)

These verses state that Acharya Pujyapada had saved the Dharma Rajya, and his feet were worshipped by the Indras. This is the reason why he was addressed as Pujyapada. He possessed many qualities like scholarship, etc., which are still being established by the scriptures written by him. He was a holder of universal knowledge like the Jina Deva, was accomplished, and had conquered Kamadeva, so the yogis addressed him by the name Jinendra Buddhi.

Many such proofs are available in inscriptions and elsewhere, which prove the significance of his three names.

We have already mentioned the Adipurana. From a mention of him and Vadiraja, it is known...

1. This fact is also supported by an inscription No. 1085 from Shravanabelagola (which is earlier than this). 2. See Shravanabelagola inscription No. 50 and the lineage of the Nandi Sangha. 3. Parsvanathacharita Sarga 1, verse 181.

Page #89:
---------------------------
## Introduction
79
It is said that they also had a name 'Dev'. It seems that their initiation name was 'Devanandi', and the mentioned Acharyas have used 'Dev' as a shortened form of this name. Therefore, this is not an independent name, but appears to be a shortened form of the name 'Devanandi'.
3 The history of the origin of the Sanghas (groups) has been given by Indranandi in his Shrutavatar. He writes that when one hundred Yojanas of Munis (ascetics) gathered together, under the supervision of Acharya Ahmbali, who was knowledgeable in the eight limbs of conduct and followed the pure practices of Dharana (concentration) and Prasarana (expansion), and were performing the Yugapratkram (cycle of time), at the end of the Yuga, while performing the Yugapratkram, Acharya Arhadbali asked the assembled Munis if all the Yatis (ascetics) had arrived. The Yatis replied that they had arrived with their respective Sanghas. Hearing this reply, he realized that this was the Kali Yuga (dark age). In this age, the Yatis would be divided by factions, and would not remain in a state of equanimity. With this thought, he gave the name 'Nandi' to some of those who had come from the cave, and 'Veer' to others. He gave the name 'Aparajit' to some of those who had come from the Ashoka Vatika (garden), and 'Dev' to others. He gave the name 'Sen' to some of those who had come from the Panchastupa (five mounds), and 'Bhadra' to others. He gave the name 'Ghandhar' to some of those who had come from the Shalmali Mahadrum (tree), and 'Gupt' to others. He gave the name 'Singh' to some of those who had come from the root of the Khandakesar tree, and 'Chandra' to others.
This shows that the original Sanghas, which were previously united and free from divisions of Sanghas and Ganas (groups), became divided into many parts. This is the story of the origin of the various Sanghas. Now, let us look at the lineage of the Nandi Sanghas, which is mentioned here. Shubhachandracharya, in his Pandav Purana, while mentioning his Guru lineage, writes:
Shrimaalsandhe'jani Nanvisanghastasmim Balaatkaargano'tiramyah.
Tatrabhavatpurvapadaamshaveedi Shrimaadhanandi Naradevavandhah. ||2||
This states that the Nandi Sanghas are a part of the Balaatkaar Gana, which is a part of the original Sanghas. In this lineage, there was Acharya Maghanandi, who was knowledgeable in the earlier scriptures and was revered by both humans and gods.
After this, the lineage mentions the names of 4 Jinachandra, 5 Padmanandi (according to this lineage, Padmanandi had four other names - Kundakunda, Vakragriva, Elacharya and Gaddhaprichch), 6 Umaswati, the author of the Tattvarth Sutra, 7 Lohacharya, 8 Yash:kiiti, 9 Yashonandi and 10 Devanandi. All these names are found in the lineage of the Nandi Sanghas in the same order. Further, in this lineage, after 11 Gunanandi, the name of 12 Vachanandi appears. However, in the lineage of the Nandi Sanghas, after 11 Jayanandi and 12 Gunanandi, the name of 13 Vajanandi appears.
_ Although the lineage of both of them is almost similar after this, we are not mentioning it here as it is not relevant to the present context. In this context, we only need to mention that Acharya Pujyapada was the head of the Nandi Sanghas, which is a part of the Balaatkaar Gana, which is a part of the original Sanghas. It is also known from other sources that his Gachchha (lineage) was known as 'Saraswati'. It is also known from this that our famous Acharyas Kundakunda and Giddhaprichchha (Umaswati) were the predecessors in this lineage.
4. Life Sketch - Who was Acharya Pujyapada, what were the names of his parents, to which lineage did he belong?
. See Jain Siddhanta Bhaskara Part 1, Kiran 4, Page 51. 2. See Jain Siddhanta Bhaskara, Part 1, Kiran 4, Page 43, for the lineage of Shubhachandracharya.

Page #90:
---------------------------
##  80
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

The introduction to all these matters was given by Shriman Pt. Nathuramji Premi in his book "Devanandi and his Jainendra Vyakaran". He wrote this introduction based on the "Poojyapad Charite" written in the Kanati language. The author of this book was the poet "Chandrasya". It is also known from the writings of Shriman Pt. Jugalkishorji Mukhtar that this biography is also mentioned in the "Rajavali". However, it is not clear how much truth and discrepancy there is in both of these. In the words of Premiji, the story is as follows:

1. Poojyapad was born to a Brahmin named Madhav Bhatt and his wife Shridevi Brahmani in a village called "Kole" in the Karnataka country. Astrologers declared the child to be "Trilok Poojya". Therefore, he was named Poojyapad. Madhav Bhatt accepted Jainism at the behest of his wife. His brother-in-law's name was "Panini". He also asked him to become a Jain. But due to the concern of reputation, he did not become a Jain and became a Vaishnavite ascetic in the village of Mudikuṇḍ. Poojyapad had a younger sister named Kamalini, who was married to Gunabhatt, and they had a son named Nagarjun.

Poojyapad saw a frog trapped in the mouth of a snake in a garden. This made him renounce the world and he became a Jain monk.

Panini was composing his grammar. He had not finished it when he realized his death was near. Knowing this, he asked Poojyapad to complete it. He agreed to do so.

Panini died due to carelessness and became a snake. Once he saw Poojyapad and hissed at him. Poojyapad said, "Have faith, I will complete your grammar." After this, he completed the Panini Vyakaran.

Before this, he had already written many books like Jainendra Vyakaran, Arhaspratisthalakshan, and Vaidak Jyotish. After Gun's death, Nagarjun became extremely poor. Poojyapad gave him a mantra of Padmavati and also told him the method of making it effective. Under its influence, Padmavati appeared before Nagarjun and showed him the plant of Siddharas.

With this Siddhir, Nagarjun started making gold. To remove his pride, Poojyapad made many pots of Siddharam in a simple plant. Nagarjun started making the Jay mountains golden, then Dharanendra Padmavati stopped him and asked him to build a Jinalaya. Accordingly, he built a Jinalaya and installed the statue of Parshvanath.

Poojyapad used to go to the Videha region by applying a celestial ointment on his feet. At that time, his disciple Vachananvi established the Bi Sangha by quarreling with his companions.

Nagarjun became very famous by performing many mantras, tantras, and rasasiddhis. Once two beautiful women came who were skilled in dancing. Nagarjun was captivated by them. They stayed there and after some time, they left with his Rasagutika.

In the song:

Poojyapad Muni practiced yoga for a long time. Then he boarded a divine chariot and traveled to many pilgrimages. On the way, his eyesight was lost, so he created a Shanti Ashtak and recited it. After this, he returned to his village and died peacefully.

Shri Motichandra Gautamchandra Kothari Faltonwal has edited another version of Sarvarthasiddhi, which was published from Solapur. In it, he has given some suggestions and discussed the grammar of this story.

1. See Jain Literature and History, p. 123.
2. See the introduction of Ratnakaranḍak.

Page #91:
---------------------------
## Introduction

An attempt has been made to establish the authenticity of the account. However, as other facts prove, the author of the Panini grammar, Panini Rishi, lived long before Pujyapada. Not only this, the Varttika of Katyayana and the Mahabhashya of Patanjali on Panini grammar, which are famous, were also written many centuries before Pujyapada. Therefore, it cannot be said on the basis of this story alone that Acharya Pujyapada lived during the time of Panini and completed his incomplete grammar. The story mentions many other events that can be called exaggerated. But one thing is clear that Acharya Pujyapada was a connoisseur of Panini grammar, its Varttika and Mahabhashya. This suggests that he may have been born in a Brahmin family and may have been a follower of another religion in the early part of his life. Therefore, the introduction of his father, mother, and family in this story may also be correct. Whatever may be the case, we can say from this story that Pujyapada was born in a Brahmin family. His father's name was Madhav Bhatt and his mother's name was Shridevi. They were residents of a village called 'Kole' and his birth name was Pujyapada. He did not marry and embraced Jainism in his childhood. Later, he saw a frog struggling in the mouth of a snake and took Muni Diksha. During his lifetime, he traveled to the Videha region many times due to the influence of the Gaganagami Lep. Based on an inscription at Shravanabelagola, it can also be said that the water used to wash his feet turned iron into gold. The story writer has also mentioned that the dust sanctified by his touch had the power to turn stone into gold. Once, while on a pilgrimage, his vision became clouded. He overcame this by composing the Shanti Ashtak. But this incident had such an impact on him that he returned from the pilgrimage and took Samadhi.

## Self-composed Literature

The following is a brief introduction to the literature that Acharya Pujyapada composed during his lifetime, including the Sarvarthasiddhi:

1. **Sarvarthasiddhi:** We have already given a detailed introduction to this.

2. **Samaashitantra:** This contains a total of 105 verses. The subject is spirituality. The name of the text is Samadhitantra. Acharya Pujyapada himself has given this information in the last verse of the text. One inscription from Shravanabelagola, dated Saka Samvat 1085, mentions it as Samadhishatak in inscription number 40. Secondly, the first bunch printed from Banaras also contains this with commentary and at the end, a praise verse is quoted in which its name is mentioned as Samadhishatak in a play on words. It seems that due to these reasons, its other name Samadhishatak became famous.

Although this text is an independent work of Acharya Pujyapada, an internal examination reveals that he composed it after assimilating the Agam created by Acharya Kundakunda. For example, this verse appears in the Niyamsar:

> णियभावंण विमुंच परभावं व गिण्हए केई।
> जाणवि पस्सदि सव्वं सोहं इदि चितए जाणी।।97॥

Now compare this with this verse from Samadhitantra:

> यवपाह्यं न गृह्णाति गृहीतं नापि मुञ्चति । जानाति सर्वथा सर्व तत्स्वसंवेद्यमस्म्यहम् ॥30॥

1. 'श्रीपूज्यपादमुनिरप्रतिभौषद्धिजीयाद्विदेहजिनदर्शनपूतगात्रः। यत्पादधौतजलसंस्पर्शप्रभावाकालायसं किल तदा कनकीचकार ॥' Inscription 108 (Saka Samvat 1355). 
2. See Introduction, page 23.

Page #92:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

If one observes closely, it becomes evident that the **Mokshapraabhrut** was the guiding light for its creation, and almost all its content has been accepted. The first verse of the **Praabhrut** is:

82
**Gaanamayan appaanam uvalayam jena jhadiyakkamena. Chauna va paravavyam namo namo tassa devassa. || 1 ||**

Now, in its light, look at the first auspicious verse of the **Samadhitantra**:

**Yenatmayatmaeva paratvenamva chaparam. Akshyaanantayoshaya tasme siddhaatmane namah. || 1 ||**

Now, take another verse from the **Mokshapraabhrut**:

**Jam maya disave ruupam tam na jaanadhi sambhaha jago vissade na sam samha jampemi kena ham. ||**

The same subject is expressed in the **Samadhitantra** in exactly the same words:

**Yanmaya drishyathe ruupam
Tan na jaanathi sarvatha. Jaanan drishyathe ruupam tatah kena braviamy aham. || 18 ||**

Not only this, but it is clear from observation that during the writing of the **Samadhitantra**, **Acharya Kundakunda's** **Samayapraabhrut** was also present before **Acharya Pujyapada**. **Acharya Kundakunda**, while explaining that internal transformations are essential and external signs alone are not sufficient for the path of liberation, said in the **Samayapraabhrut**:

**Paadilanganni va miliganni va bahupyawaraani. Vitum vadanti moodha sigaminam mokyam aggo ti. || 408 ||**
**Ma u hodi momo lingam jam dehanimmama ariha. Lingam muddatu dansonanaacharitaani seyanthi. || 409 ||**

The same fact is expressed by **Acharya Pujyapada** in the **Samadhitantra** in these words:

**Ling vehaashritam drishtam vah evam aatmano bhavah. Na muchyathe bhavatasmaalay ye lingakrutaagrahaah. ||**
**Jati vehaathita drishta deha eva aatmano bhavah. Na muchyanthe bhavatasmasase ye jatikrtaagrahaah. ||**

There is no doubt that this path of liberation is like a guiding light for those seekers who are eager to engage in their self-work. It explains in simple and heart-touching poetry how the soul, through the three distinctions of external self, internal self, and supreme self, attains the supreme self by abandoning the external self and becoming the internal self.

**Istopadesh** has a total of 51 verses. The subject matter is self-awareness, and the name of the text, **Istopadesh**, is mentioned by **Acharya Pujyapada** himself in its final verse.

While creating this work, **Acharya Pujyapada** had only one vision: to help the worldly soul recognize its true nature and, instead of considering the body, senses, and their actions as its own, to strive to be mindful of its self-work. While studying the **Samayapraabhrut**, we witness this sentiment on every step, and therefore we can say that it was created by assimilating the subject matter of the **Samayapraabhrut** and other works. For comparison, see...

Page #93:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This is my humble offering, a collection of teachings on the path of liberation. These are my external thoughts, arising from the interaction of the soul with the world. 

- I am one, existing in the present moment, free from attachment, pure, knowledgeable, and the object of the yogi's aspiration. All external thoughts, arising from interaction with the world, are completely different from me. (27)

- The soul, bound by karmic actions, is liberated from them through detachment. This is the path of the Jina, therefore, do not be attached to karmic actions. (26)

- The *Iṣṭopadesa* (a collection of teachings) contains a verse that states that even a pot can become a god through the influence of Dharma, and a god can become a pot through the influence of Adharma. As it is said:

> Even a god or a pot can be born from the poison of attachment.
> The wealth of liberation is attained by those who are righteous. (1, 29)

- While these exact words are not found in the *Iṣṭopadesa*, the Acharya (spiritual teacher) says, following the same principle:

> Better to be a vow-taker than a hell-dweller.
> The sun and the moon protect us. (3)

- This is a great help for the seeker in their spiritual practice.

- There are more than ten types of devotion, but they are primarily considered to be ten. Shriman Pandit Pannalalji Soni has compiled and published a book called *Kriyakalāpa*. This is a collection of texts. Panditji himself has compiled some of the chapters in the first chapter. The rest of the collection seems to be ancient. It is possible that the compiler was Pandit Prabhācandra. He has also written commentaries on many useful topics in this collection. He was a scholar and his name was Prabhācandra - this information was given by him himself while writing the concluding verse of the chapter on Nandīśvara-bhakti! - It is difficult to say with certainty whether the collection of all the devotions and other chapters was done by him or whether the current form of *Kriyakalāpa* is a later addition, because, firstly, Soni himself has not provided any systematic information about it. If Soni had been kind enough to mention in the introduction the number of manuscripts he used for the compilation, where they are from, and their date of writing, it would have been a great help in determining how old this collection is. Secondly, it contains many useful topics, but the absence of Pandit Prabhācandra's commentary on them makes it difficult to accept that they were before him. For example, *Prākṛtanirvāṇabhakti*, which is known in the world as *Nirvāṇakāṇḍa*, is included in this collection, but there is no commentary on it by him. While it is located in the middle of other devotions. Soni has clarified the situation in his introduction to the printed *Kriyakalāpa*, but it does not shed complete light on the matter.

- Of the devotions included in this collection, the first chapter contains seven devotions: Siddhi-bhakti, Śruta-bhakti, Cāritra-bhakti, Yogi-bhakti, Ācārya-bhakti, Nirvāṇa-bhakti, and Nandīśvara-bhakti. Of these, Nandīśvara...

1. See *Kriyakalāpa* Introduction, p. 21.
2. "Thus ends the first chapter of *Kriyakalāpaṭīkā* written by Pandit Prabhācandra, describing devotion."
3. It is certain that at the end of the chapter called *Daivaśikaraātrikapratīkramaṇa*, there is a writing available in which the year 1724 is mentioned. Therefore, it can be said that this collection is from before that time. See *Kriyakalāpa*, Introduction, p. 69.

Page #94:
---------------------------
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

Devotion in Sanskrit is only in Sanskrit, the rest of the devotions are in both Sanskrit and Prakrit. Only the Prakrit Nirvanabhakti does not have a Sanskrit commentary. Further, in the next chapter, many more devotions are collected and these also have a Sanskrit commentary by Pandit Prabhachandra. It is certain that the short devotions do not have a commentary.

**84**

Regarding these devotions, Pandit Prabhachandra informs at the end of the Prakrit Siddhibhakti that all Sanskrit devotions are created by Pujyapada Swami and Prakrit devotions are created by Acharya Kundakunda. As follows:

"Sanskritah sarvah bhaktayaḥ padapujyasvamikṛtāḥ prākṛtāstu kundakundācāryakṛtāḥ." Kriyakalāpa pṛṣṭha 167

Whether all these devotions are the work of one Acharya or many, it is difficult to say for sure. Pandit Prabhachandra, who wrote the commentary on these, probably lived sometime after Panditpravara Ashadhar and before VS 1724. Therefore, on this basis, it can only be said that these were written sometime before the 14th century VS. But this statement does not determine which Sanskrit and Prakrit devotions Pandit Prabhachandra considered to be by Pujyapada Swami and Kundakunda Acharya. It is also not known who his Swami was.

So these Pujyapada...

Pandit Pannalalji Soni has written in the introduction of Kriyakalāpa that "Siddhibhakti, Śrutibhakti, Charitrabhakti, Yogibhakti, Ācāryabhakti, Nirvāṇabhakti and Nandīśvarabhakti are the seven Sanskrit devotions created by Pujyapada Swami and Prakrit Siddhibhakti, Prakrit Śrutibhakti, Prakrit Nāriṣabhakti, Prakrit Yogabhakti and Prakrit Ācāryabhakti are the five devotions created by Kundakunda Acharya." But the reason he has given for believing this cannot be said to be appropriate. Pandit Prabhachandra has only said that all Sanskrit devotions are created by Pujyapada Swami and all Prakrit devotions are created by Kundakunda Acharya, and he has also said this at the end of his commentary on Prakrit Siddhibhakti. But looking at the order in which these devotions are collected in Kriyakalāpa, the Prakrit Siddhibhakti is number two. It is possible that Soni ji, seeing the end of the chapter on Nandīśvarabhakti, made this assumption. Whatever it may be, it is clear that in the time of Pandit Prabhachandra, these devotions were considered to be by Pujyapada Swami and Kundakunda Acharya. Scholars believe that this Pujyapada Swami must be Acharya Pujyapada, because there has been no other Acharya with this name. Secondly, the uninterrupted flow and serious style of these devotions indicate this.

In all these devotions, the subject matter is discussed according to their names. Muni, Vrati, Grihastha, Devasika, etc. have been using them in a definite order during Pratikramana, which is partially in practice even today.

**5. Jainendra Grammar**

Acharya Pujyapada's most original work is his Jainendra Grammar. Why is it called Jainendra? It is difficult to decide whether Acharya Pujyapada himself liked this name. But it has been addressed by this name since ancient times, which is clear from the mention of Pandit Bopdev, the author of Mugdha Bodha:

"Indraścandrah kāśakṛtsnāpiśalīśākataayanaḥ. Pāṇigyamaranē jayantyastau ca śābdhikāḥ."

**Chatupaṭha**

It is divided into five chapters and has about 3000 sutras. Its biggest feature is the noun...

1. Pandit Prabhachandra has quoted two verses from Anāgāradharmāmṛta in his commentary. See Kriyakalāpa introduction p. 10.
2. See commentary 3 p. 88.
3. See Jain Literature and History p. 121.

i

Page #95:
---------------------------
## Introduction

This is concise. The Jain grammar uses abbreviations for many terms, making it easier to use. Compare this to Panini's grammar.

Jainendra grammar uses short, long, and prolonged sounds. It uses the same sounds for nasal sounds. It uses the terms "guna" and "vriddhi" (vowel changes). It uses the terms "nistha" and "pratipadika" (stems).

The grammar uses abbreviations, special constructions, and omissions, which makes the sutras (rules) concise. For example, in Panini's grammar:

**Panini's Grammar:**

* **झरो झरि सवर्णे** (jharo jhari savarne)
* **झरो झरि स्वे हलो यमा यमि लोप:** (jharo jhari sve halo yama yami lopa:)
* **हलो यमा यमि खम् तुल्यास्यप्रयत्न सवर्णम्** (halo yama yami kham tulyasyaprayatna savarnam)
* **सस्थान क्रियं स्वम् ऊकालोऽज्झस्वदीर्घप्लुतः** (sasthana kriyam svam ukalodjjhasvadirghapluta:)
* **आकालोऽच् प्रदीपः** (akalo'c pradipa:)

**Jainendra Grammar:**

* **सिद्धिरनेकान्तात।** (siddhiranekantat)

The first sutra of this grammar is "siddhiranekantat."  Somdeva Suri explains this in his commentary, "Shabdarnavacandrika," saying that the meaning of words and their understanding depend on anekantavada (the doctrine of many-sidedness). This is because words have the characteristics of existence and non-existence, permanence and impermanence, and qualifier and qualified. This sutra applies to the entire text. If we don't accept anekantavada, then we can't determine what is the beginning and what is the end, what is similar and what is different.

The grammarians believe in the "sphota" theory, which states that words are eternal and their sound is produced by the contact of the tongue and other organs. However, this is not true. The sounds like "a" and words like "ghata" (pot) and "pata" (cloth) don't exist in the sky, nor are they qualities of the sky. They are produced by the combination of different sounds and disappear over time. Therefore, according to the grammarians, they cannot be considered eternal. They are eternal in relation to the pudgala dravya (matter), but they are impermanent in relation to the paryaya (modes). It is clear that Acharya Pujyapada wrote the first sutra, "siddhiranekantat," to express this idea.

The way words are defined in grammar, the terms and suffixes used, are not absolute. They are just one way of explaining the language. This is why different grammarians have used different terms and processes to explain the formation of words. Despite this, many scholars insist on specific suffixes and methods for word formation. It is possible that Acharya Pujyapada wrote the sutra "siddhiranekantat" to reject this one-sided approach.

Acharya Pujyapada mentions the views of six teachers in his Jainendra grammar: Bhootbali, Shridatta, Yashobhdra, Prabhachandra, Samantabhadra, and Siddhasena. As far as we know, none of them wrote a grammar. The views of these teachers that are mentioned in the text...

Page #96:
---------------------------
## 86
## Sarvarthasiddhi

These opinions, which have been presented as forms of Siddhi, are not new. Because, as we will explain later, their Siddhi is also evident in Panini's grammar through alternatives. Therefore, the question arises: why did Acharya Pujyapada mention these opinions separately as those of these Acharyas, when Panini's grammar was available to him and these usages were found in it? The question is serious and it is possible that it may shed light on some historical facts in the future. For the time being, it appears to us that just as Rishi Panini mentioned the opinions found in the literature available until his time in his grammar, along with the names of their authors or by using terms like 'anyatar' etc., similarly, Acharya Pujyapada mentioned the opinions found in Jain literature available until his time in his Jainendra grammar, along with the names of their authors. The details of the opinions are as follows:

**Bhutbali:** The sutra that presents the opinion of Acharya Bhutbali is 'Ravabhatbaleh'. 3, 4, 831. According to Bhutbali's opinion, the 'kha' suffix is formed from the Dvigu compound ending in 'sama'. This is the meaning of this sutra. From this, the usage 'Vaisamin:' is established as an alternative to the usage 'Samik:'. Similarly, 'Ratryah: Sambarsarat'. 3, 4, 841 and 'Varshad-upac'. 3, 4, 85. These are two other sutras that present the alternative opinion of Acharya Bhutbali. The first sutra establishes usages like 'Dviraatrinah, Vayahinah and Dvisambatsarinah' etc., while the second sutra establishes usages like 'Dvivarshah' etc. These alternative functions have been considered in Jainendra grammar according to the opinion of Acharya Bhutbali.

Panini has also indicated these alternative functions, but he has not mentioned whose opinion these functions are based on. In place of these three sutras, Panini's 'Dvigo-rva 5, 1, 86', 'Ratryah: Sambatsaran-s 5, 1, 87', and 'Varshal-luk cha 5, 1, 881' come respectively.

**Jina-Acharya Shridatta:** The sutra that presents the opinion of Acharya Shridatta is 'Gane Shrivat-syastriyam. 1.4, 341'. According to Acharya Shridatta, the fifth case ending is formed due to Guna. However, this function does not occur in the feminine gender. This is the meaning of this sutra. According to this, the usage 'Manamathah' is established as an alternative to 'Jnanen Muktah' according to Acharya Shridatta's opinion. In its place, the sutra 'Vibhasha Gun-e'astriyam. 2, 3, 25.' is found in Panini's grammar.

**Yashobadra-Acharya:** The sutra that presents the opinion of Acharya Yashobadra is 'Krishimoojam Yashobadrasth. 2, 1, 991'. According to Acharya Yashobadra, the 'kyap' suffix is formed from the roots 'kri, vrisha and mrij'. Accordingly, the alternative usages 'Kutyam, Vridhyam and Mukhyam' are established. In its place, the two sutras 'Majevibhasha. 3, 1, 113.' and 'Vibhasha Krivrukshoh 3, 1, 120.' are found in Panini's grammar.

**Prabhavakha-Acharya:** The sutra that presents the opinion of Acharya Prabhachandra is 'Ravah Kriti Prabhavastha 4, 3, 1801'. When the word 'ratri' is a secondary word and the 'kridanta' is present, the 'mum' is added according to Prabhachandra's opinion. Accordingly, the alternative usage 'Ratricharah' is established. In its place, Panini's grammar has the sutra 'Rakati Vibhasha. 6, 3, 721'.

**Samantbhadra-Acharya:** The sutra that presents the four opinions of Acharya Samantbhadra is 'Chatustayam Samast-bhasya. 5, 4, 1401'. It is mentioned in this sutra that the previous four sutras have been said according to Acharya Samantbhadra's opinion. Those four are: 'Bhayoh Hah. 5, 4, 1361', 'Shachho'ti. 5, 4, 1371', 'Halo Yama Yami Kham. 5, 4, 1381', and 'Bharo Jh-ari Swe. 5, 4, 1391'. In their place, Panini's sutras are respectively: 'Jhayoh Ho'nyatarasyam. 8, 4, 621', 'Saro'ti 184, 631', 'Halo Yama Yami Lopah. 8, 4, 64', and 'Jharo Jh-ari Savarna. 8.4, 651'.

Page #97:
---------------------------
## Introduction

According to the first sutra, 'h' is a पूर्वसवर्ण (pre-vowel) when it follows a पदान्त झय (final consonant 'y'). For example, 'सुवाग्दसति'. According to the second sutra, 'ch' replaces 'sh' when it follows a पदान्त झय (final consonant 'y'). For example, 'षट्छयामाः'. According to the third sutra, the second 'y' is deleted when it follows a हल (consonant) and is followed by 'ym'. For example, in the word 'जय्या', there are two 'y's and a third 'y' is formed by their combination. But according to the rule of this sutra, the middle 'y' is deleted and the remaining usage is 'शय्या'. According to the fourth sutra, the third 't' is deleted when it follows a हल (consonant) and is followed by a सवर्ण झर (similar consonant 't'). For example, 'भित्ताम'. These four alternative actions occur according to the opinion of Acharya Samantabhadra. While in Panini's grammar, these actions are considered to be of another opinion.

## Siddhasena-Acharya

The sutra that explains the opinion of Acharya Siddhasena is - 'वेत्तेः सिद्धसेनस्य । 5, 1, 71'. The meaning of this sutra is that according to Siddhasena, 'रुट' is added to the 'अत्' which is the आदेशभूत (substitute) for the झ् प्रत्यय (suffix 't') that follows the विद् धातु (verb root 'vid'). For example, 'संविद्रते'. In the usage 'संविदते', 'रुट' is added after the 'd' and before the 'a' to form this alternative usage. In place of this sutra, the sutra 'वेत्तेविभाषा।7,1,7.' is found in Panini's grammar.

## The Grammar

A modified form of this grammar is available in the 'गाब्दार्णवचन्द्रिका' written by Somdevsuri. But according to many proofs, Premji has proved that it is a later refined form. The original text is the one that is available in the 'महावृत्ति' written by Acharya Abhaydev. We have mentioned some of the special features of this grammar. There are many other special features due to which it has its own independent place.

## Other Works of Acharya Pujyapada

It is known from the mentions that Acharya Pujyapada wrote many other books on various subjects besides the five mentioned above. The details are as follows:

6.-7. Jainendra and Shabdavatar Nyas - The 46th inscription in the Nagar Tahsil of Shimoga district mentions that Acharya Pujyapada wrote a 'Jainendra' Nyas on his own grammar and a 'Shabdavatar' Nyas on Panini's grammar. For example:

'न्यासं जैनेन्द्रसंज्ञं सकलबुधनुतं पाणिनीयस्य भूयो। न्यासं शब्दावतारं मनुजततिहितं वैद्यशास्त्रं च कृत्वा । यस्तत्त्वार्थस्य टीका व्यरचदिह तां भात्यसो पूज्यपाद
स्वामी भूपालवन्द्यः स्वपरहितवचःपूर्णवृग्बोधवृत्तः ॥'

Both of these are not available yet. Special research is needed in ancient libraries for this.

8. Shantiastaka - We have already mentioned the story of Acharya Pujyapada. The author of that story has mentioned a 'Shantiastaka' created by him. A Shantiastaka is also collected in a ritual activity. There is a Sanskrit commentary on it by Pandit Prabhachanda. In the beginning of the Shantiastaka, Pandit Prabhachandra, while supporting the opinion of the story writer Chandrayya Kavi, says that Sri Pad Pujya Swami had a disease of the eyes called 'mirvyaadhi' and to overcome it, he praises saying, 'न स्नेहात्'. The verse that comes at the end also expresses the same sentiment through the words 'विष्टि प्रसन्नां कुरु' etc. This shows that it is possible that at the end of his life, Acharya Pujyapada's vision was covered by darkness and he composed the Shantiastaka to overcome it.

For special knowledge about the commentary, notes, and additions of this book, see the book 'Jain Sahitya aur Itihas' written by Premji.

Page #98:
---------------------------
##  All-Purpose Success (Sarvarthasiddhi)

It is written. If this assumption is correct, then the Shanti Ashtak can be considered their work, which was probably written at the end of all their works.

9. **Essence Collection (Sarasangraha)** - It is known from a mention by Dhavla that Acharya Pujyapada also created a work called 'Sarasangraha'. As follows:

"In the Sarasangraha, it is also stated that in the case of the acquisition of one of the many synonyms of an object that is infinite in synonyms, the Nay (principle) that is free from defects, which is dependent on the cause of birth, is the right one."

The characteristic of Nay given by Acharya Pujyapada in the Sarvarthasiddhi is very similar to this characteristic, therefore there is sufficient reason to believe that this work should be the work of Acharya Pujyapada.

10. **Medical Science (Chikitsa Shastra)** - There is also much evidence to prove that Acharya Pujyapada wrote an unparalleled work on the subject of medicine. As follows:

1. We have already mentioned a verse from the Jnanarnava written by Acharya Shubhachandra. In it, his words are said to remove the body's impurities, just like the impurities of speech and mind.

2. Acharya Ugraditiya, in his work called Kalyanakarak, has mentioned the medical work of Acharya Pujyapada in the words "Poojyapadena Bhashitah, Shalakyam Poojyapadprakatitam Adhikam".

3. We have already mentioned an inscription number 46 from the Nagar Taluk of Shimoga district, in which he is also called the author of medical science, who benefits human society.

4. Mangaraj, a scholar of the 15th century Vikram era, has also mentioned a medical work of Acharya Pujyapada in his Kannada language work Khagendramani Darpan.

_All these evidences show that Acharya Pujyapada probably wrote a work related to medicine._

11. **Abhisheka** - It is also known from inscription number 40 of the Saka year 1085 at Shravanabelagola that he had also composed a Jain Abhisheka text. The quote is as follows:

"Jainendra Nijashabdabhogmatalam Sarvarthasiddhi: Para Siddhanta Niputvatmudghakavita Jainabhishekah Swakah. Chandassukshmadhiyam Samaashishatakaswasthyam Yadiyam Vidam
Akyatiha Sa Poojyapāvmunipah Poojyo Muninam Ganaih."

It states that Acharya Pujyapada, whose Jainendra grammar indicates his unparalleled wealth of words, his mastery of the Sarvarthasiddhi principles, the excellence of his Jain Abhisheka poetry, and the subtlety of his Samadhishataka Chanda Shastra, which is conducive to mental health, is constantly worthy of worship by the Muni Ganas.

We have already given a brief biography of Acharya Pujyapada based on Chandrayya Kavi's 'Poojyapadacharita'. In it, Acharya Pujyapada is described as the author of Arhatprasthitalakshan, similar to Jainendra grammar and medicine, and also of astrology. It cannot be said how accurate this mention is. If it is true, then it must be said that Acharya Pujyapada also composed works on Arhatprasthita and astrology.

6. **Time Consideration** - The question of when Acharya Pujyapada lived is not particularly controversial. From the middle of the 5th century onwards, almost all the literary figures have either mentioned him or his literature in some form or another, or have followed his literature. From this point of view, the special commentary of Jinabhadra Gani Kshamasraman and the Tattvarthavatika of Akalankdeva are mainly present before us. When Bhatta Akalankdeva was writing the Tattvarthavatika, the Sarvarthasiddhi and Jainendravyakaran were present before him.

Page #99:
---------------------------
## Introduction

89
.
.
It is clearly evident. Bhattaraka Akalankadeva, in his Tattvarthavartika, presents most of the arguments of the Sarvarthasiddhi in the form of Vatikas. And wherever he felt the need to mention the rules of grammar, he usually refers to the sutras of Jainendra. Therefore, it is certain that Acharya Pujyapada came before Bhattaraka Akalankadeva. But a comparative study of the Sarvarthasiddhi and the Visheshavashakabhashya also reveals that the Sarvarthasiddhi must have been present before Jinabhadragani Kshamashraman when he wrote the Visheshavashakabhashya. For comparison, see Sarvarthasiddhi, Chapter 1, Sutra 15, where the definition of Dharana Matigyan is given in these words:
'Avestya Kalantaram Avismaranakaranam.' In the Visheshavashakabhashya, the same words are repeated and it is said:
'Kalantaram Ya Jam Punaranusaranam Dharana Sa U || Ga. 291 ||' While explaining that the eye sense organ is not capable of perceiving, the Sarvarthasiddhi, Chapter 1, Sutra 19, says:
'Manovavaprapkaryati.' The same thing is expressed in the Visheshavashakabhashya in these words:
'Loyanam Apattavisayam Manoshya || Ga. 209 ||' In Sarvarthasiddhi, Chapter 1, Sutra 20, it is doubted that at the time of the first attainment of Samyaktva, both types of knowledge arise simultaneously, therefore, it cannot be said that Shrutagyan is prior to Matigyan. As:
'Ah, Prathamasamyaktvotapti Yugapajgyanparinamamanmatipurvatvam Shrutasyanotpadyata iti.' Now, in the light of this, see this gatha from the Visheshavashakabhashya:
'Nana Nanaani Ya Samkalaai Jo Mahasuyai.
_ To Na Suyam Maipugvam Mahanaane Va Suyannaanam || Ga. 107 ||' Thus, although this comparison reveals that Acharya Pujyapada's Sarvarthasiddhi must have been present before Jinabhadragani Kshamashraman (Vikram Samvat 666), it does not shed much light on their actual time period. For this, see the following evidence:
1. In a copper plate inscription from Merkara (Kurg) written in Saka Samvat 388 (Vikram Samvat 523), the lineage of Kundakunda and the local Ganaka Munis is given along with the mention of King Avinita of the Ganga dynasty. From other evidence, it is also known that King Avinita's son's name was Duvinita and he was a disciple of Acharya Pujyapada. The reign of King Duvinita is considered to be around Vikram Samvat 538, therefore, on this basis, it can be said that Acharya Pujyapada must have lived between the latter half of the 5th century and the early half of the 6th century Vikram Samvat.
2. This fact is also corroborated by a mention in the Darshanasara of Devasena, written in Vikram Samvat 990. Devasena has stated that Vajranandi, a disciple of Shri Pujyapada, established the Dravida Sangha in Vikram Samvat 526. The mention in the Darshanasara is as follows:
Siripujjapadasiiso Davidsanghass Karago Ho. Name Na Vajjanavi Pahubvedi Mahasatto.
. See Tattvarthavartika 401, Sutra 1, Vati 3 etc. 2. See Tattvarthavartika, Chapter 4, Sutra 21. 3. Ratnakarandi, Introduction, page 142.

Page #100:
---------------------------
90
Panchasaye Chabbise
Sarvarthasiddhi
Vikkramarayassa
Maranapatassa |
Mahara Jado Davidyayo
Mahamoho ||

We have already mentioned the list of the Nandisangh in the previous section. In it, the time of Devanandi (Pujiyapada) is given from Vikram Samvat 258 to 308. After mentioning Jayanandi and Gunanandi, the name of Vajranandi is mentioned. We have also mentioned the lineage of Shubhachandracharya, the author of the Pandavapurana. In this too, the names of all the Acharyas of the Nandisangh are mentioned according to the list of the Nandisangh. But in this, after Devanandi, the name of Gunanandi is mentioned and then the name of Vachananandi is given. Here, although we may accept that this difference between the two is not very important, because according to the earlier tradition, those who received the lineage of the Acharyas in a particular order mentioned their names in that order, and in such a situation, it is natural for one or more names to be omitted or changed. But the biggest question is about the time of Acharya Pujiyapada. The names of the Acharyas mentioned in the copper plate of Merkara do not include the name of Pujiyapada, and Durvinita, the son of Avinita, was his Vidya Guru, so it seems that the names of the Acharyas preceding Acharya Pujiyapada have been omitted from the list of the Nandisangh. The names of the monks mentioned in the copper plate of Merkara are: Gunachandra, Abhayanandi, Shilabhadra, Jananandi, Gunanandi and Chandranandi. And in the list of the Nandisangh, two names, Jayanandi and Gunanandi, are mentioned between Acharya Devanandi and Vachananandi. The name Gunanandi is also mentioned in the copper plate of Merkara, and it is possible that the one whose name is given as Jananandi in the copper plate of Merkara is the same as Jayanandi mentioned in the list of the Nandisangh. If this assumption is correct, then it solves two problems. Firstly, it confirms the assumption that the names of some Acharyas preceding Acharya Pujiyapada have been omitted from the list of the Nandisangh. Secondly, according to the names mentioned in the copper plate of Merkara, the two Acharyas mentioned after Acharya Pujiyapada in the list of the Nandisangh, are considered to be preceding Acharya Pujiyapada, and according to the mention in the Darshanasara, Vachananandi is considered to be succeeding Acharya Pujiyapada. And in this way, the difficulty that appears in determining their time is resolved. Thus, considering all these facts, it can be said that Acharya Pujiyapada should be considered to be a contemporary of the middle period from the latter half of the 5th century Vikram to the first half of the 6th century. Shriman Pandit Nathuramji Premi and other scholars also have almost the same opinion.

1- See Jain Literature and History pp. 115 etc. Premiji, while considering the time of Acharya Pujiyapada, agrees with the opinion of late Dr. Kashinath Bapuji Pathak. 
We have concluded from that.

Page #101:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents
**Chapter One**
**Explanation of the Subject Matter through Special Meaning**
**Two Types of Origin of Right Faith**
**Invocation**
**1. Meaning of the Words Nature and Acquisition**
**The Uththanika of the Tattvartha Sutra**
**1. Whether Right Faith Arises from Nature or Acquisition**
**Solution to this Doubt**
**The Nature of Liberation**
**The Significance of the Word 'That' in the Sutra 'Tannisargadhighamadva'**
**The Meaning of the Word 'That' as Expounded by Different Proponents**
**The Origin and Refutation of the Nature of Liberation**
**The Names of the Seven Tattvas**
**The Nature of the Seven Tattvas as Expounded by Different Proponents in the Means of Attaining Liberation**
**The Contradictions and the Significance of the Text through Special Meaning**
**The Explanation of the Merits and Demerits**
**2. Why are the Nine Substances Not Included in the Path of Liberation?**
**The Nature of the Path of Liberation**
**4. Solution to this Doubt**
**The Etymology of the Word 'Samyak'**
**Right Knowledge and Right Conduct**
**The Meaning of the Word 'Tattva' as a Noun**
**The Nature of the Soul and Others**
**The Consideration of 'Samyak' as a Co-ordinate**
**The Significance of the Adjective**
**4. The Etymology of Faith, Knowledge, and Conduct According to the Gender and Number of the Noun**
**4. The Objection that the Adjective Should Also Have the Same Gender and Number as the Noun**
**The Objection that the Agent and the Instrument Should Be One**
**The Solution to this Objection**
**12 Solutions**
**5. The Exposition of the Four Deposits: Name, etc.**
**The Nature of the Four Deposits: Faith, Knowledge, etc.**
**The Justification for Placing the Word 'Conduct' at the End of All Four Deposits**
**13 The Exposition of the Soul through the Four Deposits**
**5. The Significance of the Singular Form of the Word 'Path'**
**5. The Utility of the Four Deposits**
**The Characteristics of Right Faith**
**6. The Etymology of the Word 'Tattva' Used in the Sutra 'Namastapanna'**
**6. The Significance of the Word 'That'**
**The Etymology of the Word 'Artha'**
**6. Explanation of the Deposits through Special Meaning**
**14 The Nature of Right Faith with the Etymology of 'Tattvartha'**
**6. The Indication of Proof and Nay**
**The Meaning of the Root 'Dasha'**
**How are the Two Types of Faith: Self-Interest and Other-Interest Possible, When the Meaning of the Root 'Dasha' is 'Light'?**
**The Solution to this Doubt**
**7. The Nature of Self-Interest and Other-Interest**
**The Justification for Placing the Word 'Proof' Before the Word 'Nay' in the Sutra on Right Faith**
**The Objections Arising from Considering 'Proof' as a Characteristic**
**The Solution to the Objections**
**The Nature of 'Nay' in Both 'Tattva' and 'Artha'**
**The Utility of 'Nay' in Both 'Sakala' and 'Vikala'**
**7. The Indication of 'Desha'**
**The Nature of the Two Fundamental Types of 'Nay': 'Saraga' and 'Vitraga'**
**The Nature of the Differences Between Them**
**7. The Subject**

Page #102:
---------------------------
## 92]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

**29**
**20**
**Sās**
**29**

**Description of the Anuyogas in the four Gatis, in relation to the six Gati-mārganās, which are the means of attaining knowledge of the Tattvas.**

**16** **Number Description**
**Indriya-mārganā** in relation to the number of Jivas. **26** **Form**
**16** **Kāya-mārganā** in relation to the description of Samyak-darshan through the Anuyoga-dvār. **16** **Yoga-mārganā** in relation to the general description of the ownership of Samyak-darshan. **16** **Veda-mārganā** in relation to the specific description of the ownership of Samyak-darshan. **16** **Kṣaya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the Anuyoga-dvār, through the translation of Gati-mārganā, in relation to the knowledge of Jñāna-mārganā. **16** **Samyama-mārganā** in relation to the description of the ownership of Samyak-darshan through Indriya-mārganā. **17** **Darśana-mārganā** in relation to the description of the ownership of Samyak-darshan. **17** **Leśyā-mārganā** in relation to the description of the number of Jivas. **18** **Kāya-ādi-śeṣa-mārganās** in relation to the description of the ownership of Samyak-darshan. **18** **Bhavya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the ownership of Samyak-darshan. **19** **Samyak-tva-mārganā** in relation to the description of the internal and external means of Samyak-darshan. **19** **Sañjñi-mārganā** in relation to the description of the internal and external means of Samyak-darshan. **20** **Āhāra-mārganā** in relation to the description of the internal and external means of Samyak-darshan.

**3. Kṣetra-prūpaṇā 29-32** General description of the field of Jivas, in relation to the description of the various types of Samyak-darshan, including Aupaśamika.

**20** **Gati-mārganā** in relation to the description of the field of Jivas. **30** **Vidhāna-anuyoga** in relation to the description of the various types of Samyak-darshan. **30** **Indriya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the various types of Samyak-darshan.

**21** **Kāya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the eight Anuyogas, which are the means of attaining knowledge of the Tattvas, including Sat, Saṅkhyā, etc. **21** **Yoga-mārganā** in relation to the description of the eight Anuyogas, including Sat, Saṅkhyā, etc. **21** **Veda-mārganā** in relation to the description of the eight Anuyogas, including Sat, Saṅkhyā, etc. **21** **Jñāna-mārganā** in relation to the description of the eight Anuyogas, including Sat, Saṅkhyā, etc., through the description of their form, ownership, etc.

**22** **Samyama-mārganā** in relation to the description of the Anuyoga-dvār, including Sat. **22** **Darśana-mārganā** in relation to the description of the Anuyoga-dvār, including Sat. **22** **Leśyā-mārganā** in relation to the description of the Jiva-tattva. **22** **Bhavya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the Jiva-tattva. **22** **Samyak-tva-mārganā** in relation to the description of the fourteen Mārganās, which are the means of attaining specific knowledge of the Jiva-tattva. **22** **Sañjñi-mārganā** in relation to the description of the fourteen Mārganās. **22** **Āhāra-mārganā** in relation to the description of the Jiva-tattva, through the general and specific types of Sat-prūpaṇā.

**32** **Description of the fourteen Mārganās.**
**32** **Description of the general and specific types of Sat-prūpaṇā.**
**32** **Description of the Jiva-tattva.**

**22** **Explanation of Kṣetra-prūpaṇā through specific meanings.**
**32** **Description of the possible Guṇa-sthānas in the fourteen Mārganās.**

**4. Sparśana-prūpaṇā 33-39** Description of the touch of Jivas in relation to the Guṇa-sthānas.

**23** **Guṇa-sthāna** in relation to the description of the touch of Jivas. **33** **2. Saṅkhyā-prūpaṇā 24-29** Description of the number of Jivas in relation to the fourteen Guṇa-sthānas.

**24** **Gati-mārganā** in relation to the description of the number of Jivas. **24** **Indriya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the number of Jivas. **24** **Kāya-mārganā** in relation to the description of the number of Jivas.

Page #103:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**1. Touch-Description**
* **Yoga-Margana**'s perspective on the touch of living beings 35
* **Leshya-Margana**'s perspective on the difference in the form of living beings 56
* **Ved-Margana**'s perspective 36
* **Bhavya-Margana**'s perspective, **Kshaya-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Samyak-Tva-Margana**'s perspective, **Jnana-Margana**'s perspective 37
* **Sanjna-Margana**'s perspective, **Samyama-Margana**'s perspective 37
* **Ahar-Margana**'s perspective, **Darshan-Margana**'s perspective 37

**2. Time-Description**
* **Ved-Margana**'s perspective on the time of living beings in relation to the fourteen **Gunasthanas** 39
* **Kshaya-Margana**'s perspective, **Gati-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Jnana-Margana**'s perspective, **Indriya-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Samyama-Margana**'s perspective, **Kaya-Margana**'s perspective 42
* **Darshan-Margana**'s perspective, **Yoga-Margana**'s perspective 42
* **Leshya-Margana**'s perspective, **Ved-Margana**'s perspective 43
* **Bhavya-Margana**'s perspective, **Kshaya-Margana**'s perspective 44
* **Samyak-Tva-Margana**'s perspective, **Jnana-Margana**'s perspective 44
* **Sanjna-Margana**'s perspective, **Samyama-Margana**'s perspective 44
* **Ahar-Margana**'s perspective, **Darshan-Margana**'s perspective 45

**3. Feeling-Description**
* **Leshya-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Bhavya-Margana**'s perspective on the feeling of living beings in the fourteen **Gunasthanas** 60-63
* **Gati-Margana**'s perspective, **Samyak-Tva-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Indriya-Margana**'s perspective, **Sanjna-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Kaya-Margana**'s perspective, **Ahar-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Yoga-Margana**'s perspective 39

**4. Less-More-Description**
* **Leshya-Margana**'s perspective on the less-more description of living beings in the fourteen **Gunasthanas** 63
* **Bhavya-Margana**'s perspective 
* **Gati-Margana**'s perspective, **Samyak-Tva-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Indriya-Margana**'s perspective, **Sanjna-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Kaya-Margana**'s perspective, **Ahar-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Yoga-Margana**'s perspective 46

**5. Difference-Description**
* **Ved-Margana**'s perspective on the difference in living beings in the fourteen **Gunasthanas** 47
* **Kshaya-Margana**'s perspective, **Gati-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Jnana-Margana**'s perspective, **Indriya-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Samyama-Margana**'s perspective, **Kaya-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Darshan-Margana**'s perspective, **Yoga-Margana**'s perspective 52
* **Leshya-Margana**'s perspective, **Ved-Margana**'s perspective 52
* **Bhavya-Margana**'s perspective, **Kshaya-Margana**'s perspective 54
* **Samyak-Tva-Margana**'s perspective, **Jnana-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Sanjna-Margana**'s perspective, **Samyama-Margana**'s perspective, 
* **Ahar-Margana**'s perspective, **Darshan-Margana**'s perspective 56

**6. Five Types of Right Knowledge** 44

Page #104:
---------------------------
##  94] Sarvarthasiddhi

The nature of the five types of Samyak Jnana, starting with Bhati Jnana, is explained in the order of their occurrence. The reason for this order is to indicate that these five types of Jnana are two forms of Pramana.

**Refutation of the validity of Karṣa and Indriya as Pramana**

The fruit of Jnana is explained. The defects arising from considering Sannikarṣa and Indriya as Pramana are explained in detail, along with their remedies.

**Indirect Jnana**

The nature of Parokṣa Jnana is explained.

**Direct Jnana**

The nature of Pratyakṣa Jnana is explained.

**Refutation of the validity of Vibhangashana as Pramana**

The defects in considering Jnana arising from Indriya-vyāpāra as Pratyakṣa are explained.

**Synonyms of Mati Jnana**

The synonyms of Mati Jnana are explained.

**Etymology and meaning of Mati, Smriti, and Chintadi**

The origin of Mati Jnana is explained. The nature of Indriya and Anindriya is explained. The meaning of the word "Tatt" is explained.

**Types of Mati Jnana**

The nature of Avagraha, etc. is explained.

**Types of objects of Avagraha, etc.**

The nature of Bahu, etc. is explained.

**Difference between Bahu and Bahuvidha**

The difference between Ukt and Niḥsṛta is explained.

**Information about the alternative reading "Kṣipraniḥsṛta" and its meaning**

The difference between Ghra, Avagraha, and Dhāraṇa is explained.

**Avagraha, etc. are the meanings of Bahu, etc.**

The meaning of giving the word "Artha" is explained.

**Vyāñjana is the Avagraha**

The meaning of the word "Vyāñjana" is explained.

**Difference between Vyāñjanavagraha and Arthavagraha**

Vyāñjanavagraha does not occur through the eye or mind.

**Proof of the inability of the eye and mind to achieve this**

The nature of Śruta Jnana and its types are explained.

**Refutation of objections arising from accepting Śruta Jnana based on Mati**

**Śruta is sometimes eternal and sometimes finite due to the difference in Naya**

**Śruta Jnana also arises from Śruta**

**Solution to this doubt**

**Types of Śruta and their causes**

**Explanation of Śruta Jnana through special meaning**

**The owner of Bhava-pratyaya Avadhi Jnana**

**Reason for calling it Bhava-pratyaya**

**The owner of Kṣayopaśama-nimittaka Avadhi Jnana**

**Six types of Avadhi Jnana and their nature**

**Types and nature of Manaḥparyaya Jnana**

**Meaning of Ṛjūmati and Vipulmati**

**The scope and time of these two types of Jnana**

**Difference between Ṛjūmati and Vipulmati Manaḥparyaya Jnana**

**Meaning of Viśuddhi and Apratipāta**

**Detailed explanation of the difference between the two types of Jnana due to Viśuddhi and Apratipāta**

**Speciality of Avadhi Jnana and Manaḥparyaya Jnana**

**Detailed explanation of the difference between the two types of Jnana due to Viśuddhi, etc.**

**The subject of Mati Jnana and Śruta Jnana**

**Mati Jnana involves the mind in formless substances**

**The subject of Avadhi Jnana**

**The subject of Manaḥparyaya Jnana**

**The subject of Kevala Jnana**

**Explanation of the types of Jnana possible in one Jiva at the same time**

**Explanation of Mithyā Jnana**

**Explanation of the causes of Mithyā Jnana**

**Description of the causes: Viparyāsa, Bhedābheda-viparyāsa, and Svarūpa-viparyāsa**

**Types of Naya**

**The nature of Naya**

**100 The nature of Nangamana Naya**

**100 84 The nature of Sangraha Naya**

**101**

Page #105:
---------------------------
Table of Contents
[95
123
124
The Nature of Conduct Nayas
101 The Nature of the Differences in Use and the Nature of the Straightforward Nayas of the Course of Tendencies 102 Instructions
117 The Nature of Word Nayas 102 The Differences in Beings
118 The Nature of Similar Nayas 103 The Meaning of the Word Samsara
119 The Nature of Such Nayas 103 The Nature of Substance Transformation
119 The Interrelation of Nayas and the Gradual
Transformation of the Field,
119 The Subtlety of the Subject 104 The Transformation of Time,
120 Explanation of Nayas by Special Meaning 104 The Transformation of Existence,
120 The Transformation of Emotion,
121 Chapter Two
The Differences in Samsaric Beings The Description of the Extraordinary Emotions of Beings 107 The Two Differences in Mind and the Meaning of Samanaska and Amanaska, Upashama, etc. 107 The Meaning of the Word
123 The Significance of the Order of Upaśamika, etc. Emotions 107 The Differences in Samsaric Beings from Another Point of View 123 The Number of Differences in Emotions
108 The Significance of Giving the Word Samsaric in the Sutra 123 The Difference of the Dvinavastadi, etc. Words with Two
Pras and the Agamic Meaning of the Words Sthavar 124 Types of Compound Words 108 The Differences in Sthavar Beings
124 The Two Differences in Upaśamika Emotion 109 How Upaśamika Samyaktva Arises
The Description of the Nature of the Earth, Earth Body, Earth-bodied and 109 Earth-being, Kalalabdhi 109 The Life of Sthavar Beings
124 How Upaśamika Charitra Arises
The Differences in Tras Beings
125 The Meaning of the Words Dvi-indriya, etc. The Nine Differences in Nayika Emotion
110 The Life of Dvi-indriya, etc. Beings The Nature of the Nine Kshayika Emotions and Their Function 110 The Number of Senses
126 Kshayika Dana, etc. Done Abhayadana, etc. Siddhas
The Senses Do Not Include Karmendriyas 127 Why They Do Not Happen, the Reason 111 The Two Differences in Senses
127 The Eighteen Differences in Kshayopaśamika Emotion 112 The Two Differences in Dravyendriya
127 The Nature of the Eighteen Differences in Kshayopaśamika Emotion 112 The Meaning of Nirvati and Instrument and Their Differences 127 The Twenty-One Differences in Audayika Emotion 114 The Two Differences in Bhavendriya
127 The Nature of the Differences in Audayika Emotion 114 The Meaning of Labdhi and Use
127 In Upaśāntakshaya, etc., Why is Shukla-leshya
The Reason for Calling Use a Sense Considered to be of This Type, Instruction
115 The Objects of the Five Senses The Three Differences in Pariṇāmika Emotion
115 The Existence, etc. of Other Pariṇāmika Emotions by Karma-sadhana and Bhava-sadhana, Then Why Are Sparśa, etc. Not Achieved
129 The Solution to This Doubt 115 The Two Meanings of the Word Śruta
130 The Disclosure of Pariṇāmika Emotions by Special Meaning 116 Beings Up to Plants Have One Sense 130 The Characteristic of a Being
116 The Cause of the Origin of the Touch Sense 131 The Nature of Use
117 Krimi, etc. Beings Have Two Original Senses 131 The Differences and Sub-differences in Use
117 The Name and Designation of the Senses in the Order in Which They Increased 131
125
125
128 129

Page #106:
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: The Nature of Sentient Beings

**96] Sarvarthasiddhi**

**146** The nature of sentient beings

**132** The significance of giving the non-retributive state of mind to the Vaikriya and Aharaka bodies. Why is it not said?

**1411** The cause of the movement of the being in the state of disintegration. The eternal connection of Tejas and Karman.

**141** The meaning of the words disintegration, karma, and yoga.

**133** The significance of the word 'cha'.

**141** The rules of movement.

**133** The owners of Tejas and Karman.

**142** The meaning of the word 'Shreni'.

**133** The number of bodies that can be obtained by a single being at the same time.

**142** The significance of the word 'Gati'.

**134** The non-enjoyment of the Karman body.

**143** The establishment of the rules of time and space.

**134** The meaning of the word 'Upbhog'.

**143** The meaning of the word 'Vigrah'.

**134** The Tejas body is also non-enjoyable, then why is it not accepted in the sutra 'A-vigraha Jeevasya'?

**143** The rule of movement and time of the worldly being.

**134** From which births does the Audarika body occur?

**144** Being born in a non-retributive field after dying in a non-retributive field.

**135** The Vaikriya body is also a cause of attainment.

**144** The time-direction of the non-disintegrated movement.

**135** The Tejas body is a cause of attainment.

**144** The time-direction of non-Aharaka beings.

**135** The characteristics and owner of the Aharaka body.

**145** The meaning of the word 'Ahar'.

**136** The meaning of the words 'Shubh' etc.

**145** The types of birth.

**136** The purpose of the origin of the Aharaka body.

**136** The description of the Vedas of the Naraka and Sammuchhina beings.

**146** How many of the 84 lakh Yonis are there for whom?

**136** The meaning of the word 'Naraka'. The types of Yonis.

**136** The description of the Vedas of the Devas.

**146** The meaning of the words 'Sachitta' etc.

**136** The description of the Vedas of the remaining beings.

**147** The significance of the word 'Tat'.

**137** The two types of gender and their meaning.

**147** The difference between Yoni and birth.

**137** The etymology of the words 'Stri' etc.

**147** The revelation of which Yoni belongs to which being.

**137** The description of the non-pawayushk beings.

**147** The owners of the Garbha birth.

**138** The meaning of the words 'Aupapadhik' etc.

**148** The meaning of the words 'Jarayu' etc.

**138** The instruction of the variant reading.

**148** The owners of the Uppaad birth.

**138**

**Chapter 3**

**139** The seven realms of Naraka and their basis.

**150** The three sutras that describe the owners of the birth realms.

**139** The significance of the words 'Ratnaprabha' etc.

**150** They are normative.

**139** The significance of the word 'Bhoomi'.

**151** The five types of bodies.

**139** The meaning of the words 'Audarika' etc. in the realms, the three Vata Valayas, and the Akash.

**139** The progressive subtlety of the bodies in the relationship of base and supported.

**140** The significance of the seven words.

**151** The three bodies before Tejas are countless times more subtle than the progressive realms.

**140** The explanation of the lower world through special meaning.

**151** The expectation.

**140** The number of Narakas (caves) in the realms.

**152** The proof of the multiplier.

**140** The consideration of the Naraka arrangements in the realms.

**151** The last two bodies are infinitely subtle.

**141** The consideration of the Naraka beings constantly having worse Leshya etc.

**153** The meaning of the word 'Prati-ghat'.

**141** The meaning of the word 'Nitya'.

**141** The non-retributive nature of the Tejas and Karman bodies.

**151**

**153**

Page #107:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**159**
* Consideration of the bodies of the Narakas and the height of their bodies
* The reason for the intense suffering of the Narakas
* Consideration of heat and cold in the Narakas
* What is the height and depth, and how do the Narakas react unfavorably to their nature and add unfavorable causes?
* The color of the mountains
* The Narakas cause suffering to each other
* Instructions on the causes of mutual suffering
* Swords, spears, mountains, and ponds are formed due to the reactions of the Narakas

**160**
* The Narakas cause suffering to each other
* Instructions on the causes of mutual suffering
* Swords, spears, mountains, and ponds are formed due to the reactions of the Narakas
* The dimensions and extent of the first pond
* The depth of the first pond
* The measure of the lotus in the first pond

**161**
* The suffering of the Asuras from the third land
* The meaning of the word Asura
* The meaning of the complex adjectives of the Asuras
* Some Ambavarishadya Devas are the cause of suffering
* The reason why the Narakas do not die prematurely
* The excellent lifespan of the Narakas
* The meaning of the term "Sattvanam"
* The meaning of the term "Tiryanchloka"

**162**
* The reason why the Narakas do not die prematurely
* The excellent lifespan of the Narakas
* The meaning of the term "Sattvanam"
* The meaning of the term "Tiryanchloka"
* Instructions on the main names of the islands and seas
* Instructions on the many names of the islands and seas
* The fourteen rivers flowing in the aforementioned regions
* The rivers flowing to the eastern sea
* The rivers flowing to the western sea

**163**
* The diameter and shape of the islands and seas
* The meaning of each term in the sutra
* The insertion and diameter of Jambudvipa
* The reason for the name Jambudvipa
* The families of the Ganga and Sindhu rivers
* The form of the Ganga and Sindhu rivers
* The meaning of the middle world and Mount Sumeru
* The extent of the Bharat Kshetra

**164**
* The names of the seven regions
* The extent of the mountains and regions beyond Videha
* The names Bharat, etc., are uncaused and eternal

**165**
* The extent of the northern regions and mountains
* Consideration of which region is where
* Time-created changes in the Bharat and Airavata regions
* This change is not of the region, but of the beings there
* The division of the seven regions by the six Kulachal mountains
* These mountains extend from where to where

**166**
* This change is caused by experience, lifespan, and evidence

Page #108:
---------------------------
##  Sarvarthasiddhi

**Chapter 4**

**Meaning of words like Anubhava etc.**

* Two types of time and six divisions of each
* Six divisions of humans
* Meaning of the word Arya and divisions of Aryas
* Divisions of Mlechchas and their description
* Description of Antarvipas in relation to Mlechchas
* Shaka, Yavana etc. are Mlechchas of Karmabhoomi
* Where is Karmabhoomi located?
* Where are Bhogbhoomis located?
* Meaning of the word Karma
* Reason for becoming Karmabhoomi and Bhogbhoomi
* Superior and inferior conditions of humans
* Three types of Palyas and method of proving them
* Proof of Uddharasagar
* Counting of islands and oceans
* Proof of Addhasagar
* What is counted in Addhasagar?
* Superior and inferior conditions of Tiryanchas
* Meaning of the word Tiryanchyoonij
* Two types of time and their Kalpa names
* Proof of Sushma, Mushma etc. times
* Remaining lands
* Life span of humans in Haimvata etc.
* Which time prevails in Haimvata etc. areas?
* Description of color, food etc. of humans in those areas
* Description of northern areas similar to southern areas
* Proof of time in Videha
* Time, height, food and lifespan of humans in Videha
* Proof of the east
* Justification of the diameter of Bharat Kshetra
* Which ocean is after Jambudvipa and which island is after that?
* Description of the area of Ghataki Khand island
* Two Ishvakar mountains dividing Ghataki Khand island into two parts
* Two Merus in Ghataki Khand island
* Two Bharat etc. areas and two Himavan etc. in Ghataki Khand island
* Arrangement and diameter of areas and mountains in Ghataki Khand island
* Pataki tree with family in Ghataki Khand island
* Kalod ocean after Ghataki Khand island and its extent
* Description of area etc. in Pushkarardha
* Ishvakar mountains and Pushkar tree etc. in Pushkarardha
* Reason for the name Pushkarardha
* Humans are before Manushottar mountain
* Special description of Manushottar mountain
* Even Siddhadhari humans cannot cross Manushottar mountain

**Meaning of the word Deva**

* Four types of Devas
* Meaning of the word Nikaya
* Leshya in the first three Nikayas
* Description of internal divisions in Devanikayas
* Significance of giving Kalpopapanna Pada
* Naming of internal divisions in Devanikayas
* Meaning of words like Indra etc.
* How many internal divisions are there in Vyantar and Jyotishis?
* Consideration of Indras in the first two Nikayas
* Names of Indras of each internal division of each Nikaya
* Consideration of Pravichar in Aishan Kalpas
* Consideration of Pravichar in remaining Kalpas
* Significance of giving Pravichar Pada
* There is no Pravichar in Kalpatit Devas

**Note:** This translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. However, it is important to note that some of these terms may have different interpretations depending on the context and the specific Jain tradition.

Page #109:
---------------------------
Table of Contents
[99
183
Are this
194
185
Ten kinds of Bhavanavasis 182 Kalpa designation till the Praveyak
192 Meaning of the word Bhavanavasi 182 Residence of Laukantika Devas
192 Meaning of the word Kumar in names like Asurakumar
Meaning of the word Laukantika
192
182 Names of the eight kinds of Laukantikas
192 Residence of Bhavanavasis
182 Which Laukantika resides in which direction, its consideration
Eight kinds of Vyantaras
193 Meaning of the word Vyantara
183 'Cha' word indicates all other Laukantikas Residence of Vyantaras 183
193 Five kinds of Jyotishis 183 Vijaya etc. have Dvicharama Devas
193 Meaning of the word Jyotishka
183 Reason for not including all meanings by the word 'Adi' 193 Reason for giving 'Suryaachandramasau' separately 183 Meaning of the word Dvicharama Residence of Jyotishis with complete description 183 What is included from Tiryanchyooni, its detailed
explanation
194
184 Tirthach are present in all lokas, therefore their area is not mentioned
194 Jyotishka Devas reside at a distance from Mount Meru, their circumambulation
184 Excellent lifespan in Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas 195 Circumambulation of Bhavanavasis
- 184 Excellent lifespan in Sanatkumar and Mahendra Kalpas 195 Division of time due to moving Jyotishkas, 'Adhike' is an authoritative statement of this
195 Two kinds of time and the nature of Vyavahar Kalpa 185 Excellent lifespan in the remaining twelve Kalpas
196 Jyotishka Vimanas are situated outside the human loka
186 Meaning of the word 'Tu'
196 Authoritative sutra from the context of the description of Vaimanikas 186
Excellent lifespan in Kalpatita Vimanas
196 Meaning of the word Vimana and consideration of its kinds 186
Reason for taking the word 'Sarvarthasiddhi' separately 196 Two kinds of Vaimanikas
187
197 Vaimanika Devas reside above and above 187
Inferior lifespan in Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas 197
Consideration of inferior lifespan in all the rest, how many Kalpa Vimanas do those Devas reside in
Inferior lifespan in the second and other Narakas 187
198
Inferior lifespan in the first Naraka Reason for using the word Saudharma etc. 158
198 Height of Mount Meru and the amount of Avgaha 188
Inferior lifespan in Bhavanavasis
199
Inferior lifespan in Vyantaras. Meaning of the words Adholoka etc. 188
199
Excellent lifespan in Vyantaras Where is the Riju Vimana of Saudharma Kalpa
Excellent lifespan in Jyotishis, its indication
199
Inferior lifespan in Jyotishis Reason for giving 'Navasu' separately 189
200 Consideration of lifespan in Laukantika Devas
200 Progressive position of Devas, special features due to Prabhava etc. 189 Meaning of words like Gati etc., what is the height of the body of the Devas of that place etc.
Consideration of the fifth chapter  _190 Indication of Ajivikaaya dravyas
201 Consideration of Leshya in Vaimanika Devas 190 Meaning of giving the word Kaya
201 Attempt to reconcile the sutra-artha with the Agama 191 Ajiva is the general designation of Dharma etc. dravyas 201
197
199
189
190

Page #110:
---------------------------
## 100]]
Sarvarthasiddhi
20
...
214
This is the instruction about the substances like Dharma, etc. 202 The meaning of the word 'Loka'
211 The etymology of the word 'Dravya'
202 The two divisions of Akasha and their meaning 211 The reason for the division of Loka and A-Loka due to the combination of the general term 'Dravyatva' of Dharma, etc.
211 These are not substances, a reasoned consideration 202
Dharma and Adharma substances are pervasive in Loka 211 Objection to the view that 'Gunasamudayo Dravyam'
212 Pudgala substances reside in one region of Loka, etc. 202
The etymology of the word 'Dravya' and its establishment 202
How do the concrete Pudgalas stay together, a consideration 212 The reason for using the plural form 'Dravyani' and other
Jivas reside in countless parts of Loka, etc. 212 instructions about the characteristics
203 Instruction about the fact that countless Jivas with bodies and countless parts of Jivas are also substances 203 How do they reside in the beginning, a consideration 213 The inclusion of substances accepted by the Naiyayikas
The reason for Jivas residing in countless parts, etc. 213 The establishment 203 The benefit of Dharma and Adharma substances
214 The characteristics of substances
205 The meaning of the words 'Gati', 'Sthiti' and 'Upagraha' 114 Explanation of each word like 'Nitya', etc.
205
The significance of the word 'Upagraha' 205
The consideration that Pudgala substance is in the form of 'Rupa'
205
The reason for considering 'Gati' and 'Sthiti' as the form of Dharma and Adharma substances 206
The meaning of the word 'Rupa'
215 The consideration that there are individual substances up to Akasha 206
The reason for the absence of restrictions on 'Gati' and 'Sthiti' 215 The significance of accepting the word 'Dravya' in the Sutra 206
The establishment of Dharma and Adharma substances 207 Dharma, etc. substances are inactive
215
The benefit of 'Avasha' 216 The meaning of the word 'Nishkriya'
207
How does Akasha encompass inactive Dharma, etc. substances? 216 The establishment of 'Utpada', etc.
208
The two divisions of the production of Akasha due to the collision of two Skandhas 208 The loss of 'Avasha' donation does not occur
216 Inactive Dharma, etc. substances are the cause of 'Gati', etc.
How are subtle Pudgalas, even though they give space to each other? 208 The loss of 'Avasha' donation of Akasha does not occur 208 The regions of Dharma, Adharma and one Jiva
The support for the fact that it does not occur 208 The benefit of countless Pudgalas 208 The three divisions of 'Asankhyeya'
The meaning of the word 'Pradesha'
208 The establishment of the Pudgalatva of the Karman body 217 Dharma and Adharma substances are pervasive in Loka and Akasha 208 The two divisions of 'Vachana' and their nature 208 The establishment of the fact that the Pudgala-Jiva body, even though it has a quantity, becomes pervasive in Loka at the time of 'Samudghata'
208 The two divisions of 'Mana' and their nature 209 The consideration of the regions of Pudgala and Akasha
209 The establishment of the fact that 'Mana' is not another substance 218 The consideration of the regions of Pudgalas
209 The meaning of the words 'Pran' and 'Apan' 209 The significance of the word 'Ba'
209 The establishment of the Pudgalatva of 'Mana', 'Pran' and 'Apan' 219 The three divisions of 'Ananta'
209 The establishment of the existence of the soul 219 In the 'Asankhyata-Pradeshi' Loka, the other benefits of 'Ananta-Ananta-Pradeshi' Pudgalas
How does the Skandha fit in, a consideration 209 The meaning of words like 'Sukha', 'Dukha', etc.
219 There are no two initial regions of the Anu
The significance of the word 'Upagraha'
220 All substances are encompassed in Loka and Akasha 210 The benefit of Jivas
220 The consideration of 'Adhara-Adheya'
210 The benefit of 'Kala'
216
217
218
210
219
219
222

Page #111:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

[101
222
234
226
Meaning of the word "Vartana"
222 Even similar entities are bound in the presence of unequal qualities. This is supported by the fact that time is not a substance. The existence of time is established in the sutra by the use of the word "sadrisha" (similar).
234 Meaning of the word "Parinam"
The binding of two entities with more qualities. Meaning of the word "Kriya". 223 Detailed discussion of the types of binding.
234 Consideration of "Paratva" and "Aparatva"
223 When binding occurs, entities with more qualities become distinct from the resultant "Vartana" and acquire "Parinama" etc.
235 Purpose
223 Characteristics of a substance
237 Characteristics of "Pudgala"
273 Reasons for the distinction between one substance and another. Meaning of words like "Sparsha" (touch) etc. and their differences. 223 "Sayuktika" (joint) proof.
237 Even though the sutra says "Rupinah Pudgalah" (Pudgalas are those which have form), time is also a substance.
238 Proof of the substantiality of time.
224 Reason for the statement of the sutra.
239 Reason for calling time a separate substance.
224 Indication of synonyms for "Pudgala".
239 Consideration of time through special meaning. 224
240 Two types of words and their special consideration.
Time has infinite synonyms in the form of "Samaya" (time). 225
Proof of the two types of binding and their special consideration.
241 Two types of "Saukshmya" (subtlety) and their consideration.
225
Characteristics of "Guna" (quality).
225 Two types of "Sthaulya" (grossness) and their consideration.
242
Characteristics of "Gana" (group). Consideration of "Sansthana" (structure) with its different types. 225
Arrangement
242 Six types of "Bheda" (difference) and their consideration.
225 Nature of "Parinam" (result).
243 Indication of the nature of "Tama" (darkness) etc.
Two types of "Parinam" and their proof. Types of "Pudgala".
226 Meaning of the word "Anu" (atom).
226
Sixth chapter. Meaning of the word "Skandha" (aggregate).
227 Cause of the origin of "Skandha". 227 Nature of "Yoga" (combination).
244 Meaning of "Bheda" (difference) and "Sanghata" (combination).
227 Meaning of the word "Karma" (action).
244 Significance of the plural indication.
227 Types of "Yoga".
244 Cause of the origin of "Anu".
228
Nature of "Kaya" (body), "Vachan" (speech) and "Manoyoga" (mental application). 244 The purpose of using the word "Bheda" in the sutra "Bhedasanghatebhyah".
228 Nature of "Asrava" (influx).
245 How "Achakshasha" (unconscious) and "Chakshasha" (conscious) occur. Consideration of this. 228 These three "Kaya" etc. "Yoga" are divided into two parts: auspicious and inauspicious.
245 Explanation of "Sat" (truth). 229 Nature of auspicious "Yoga".
245 Meaning of words like "Utpad" (production) etc. 229 Nature of inauspicious "Yoga".
245 In what sense is the word "Yukt" (combined) used?
Explanation of the words "Punya" (merit) and "Papa" (demerit).
245 Consideration of this.
229 How many types of "Samparayika" (worldly) and "Iryapatha" (path) "Asrava" are there?
246 Explanation of the word "Nitya" (eternal). 230 "Mukhhyata" (primary) and "Gaunata" (secondary) establish "Anekanta" (multi-facetedness). 231 Two types of "Asrava" owners.
246 Cause of the binding of "Pudgalas". 232 Meaning of the word "Kashaya" (passion).
246 Meaning of the word "Sapraya".
246 Meaning of the word "Irya".
246 Binding of entities with lesser qualities does not occur. 233 Binding of similar entities does not occur in the presence of equal qualities. 233
243
]

Page #112:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 7:  The Nature of Asrava (Inflow)

**102]**

**The Different Types of Asrava**

**Detailed Explanation of the 25 Actions**

**Instructions on the Reasons for the Special Characteristics of Asrava**

**Explanation of Terms Like "Tivra" (Intense) and "Mand" (Mild) and the Two Types of Adhikarana (Authority)**

**Mentioning the 108 Types of Jivaadhikarana (Authority of the Soul)**

**The Significance of the Term "B"**

**Types of Ajivadhikarana (Authority of Non-Soul)**

**Meaning of Terms Like "Nisarga" (Nature)**

**The Significance of the Term "Par" (Other)**

**Explanation of the Different Types of Asrava in the Categories of Nirvartana (Completion) etc.**

**Asrava of Jnanaavaran (Obscuration of Knowledge) and Darshanavaran (Obscuration of Perception)**

**The Reason for Using the Plural Form "Jivajiva"**

**249 Types of Jivaadhikarana**

**Explanation of Each Term Like "Sanrambh" (Beginning) etc.**

**Meaning of Each Term Like "Pradosh" (Obscuration) etc.**

**The Difference Between Asadan (Enjoyment) and Upghāt (Destruction)**

**How Knowledge and Perception are Grasped Through the Term "Tat"**

**Explanation of Each Term in the Sutra**

**The Significance of the Term "Iti"**

**Sarvarthasiddhi (Complete Meaning)**

**246**

**247**

**Asrava of Ticha (Animals)**

**Detailed Explanation of the Asrava of Tiryanchayus (Animals)**

**248**

**Asrava of Manushya (Humans)**

**Detailed Explanation of the Asrava of Manushya (Humans)**

**248**

**Other Asrava of Manushya (Humans)**

**249**

**Asrava of All Four Ayus (Life Forms)**

**The Significance of the Term "Cha"**

**Asrava of Darshanamoha (Obscuration of Perception)**

**Explanation of Terms Like "Kevali" (Omniscient) etc. with Examples**

**Explanation of Avarnavad (Non-Description)**

**Rimoha (Obscuration)**

**How Pradosh etc. are the Cause of Asrava of Both Jnanaavaran and Darshanavaran**

**Asrava of Asataavedaniya (Non-Perceivable)**

**Explanation of Each Term Like "Duhkha" (Pain) etc.**

**Types of Duhkha (Pain) Like "Goka" (Cow) etc. and the Reason for Their Separate Consideration**

**250**

**250**

**250**

**251**

**251**

**251**

**251**

**251**

**252**

**252**

**253**

**If Duhkha etc. are Asrava of Asataavedaniya, then Why Do We Perform Actions Like Cutting Hair? A Logical Explanation**

**Asrava of Sataavedaniya (Perceivable)**

**252**

**253**

**253**

**255**

**255**

**255**

**Explanation of Terms Like "Kashaya" (Passion) etc.**

**Detailed Explanation of the Asrava of Charitramoha (Obscuration of Conduct)**

**256**

**Asrava of Kama (Desire)**

**256**

**Detailed Explanation of the Asrava of Kama (Desire)**

**256**

**Asrava of Deva (Gods)**

**Explanation of Each Term in the Sutra**

**Other Asrava of Devayus (Gods)**

**The Purpose of Creating a Separate Sutra for "Samyaktva" (Right Faith)**

**Asrava of Anshum (Karma of the Soul)**

**Explanation of Each Term in the Sutra**

**Detailed Explanation of the Asrava of Ashubhanamkarma (Karma of Bad Name)**

**Asrava of Shubhanamkarma (Karma of Good Name)**

**The Significance of the Term "Cha"**

**Detailed Explanation of the Asrava of Shubhanamkarma (Karma of Good Name)**

**Asrava of Tirthankara Prakriti (Nature of a Tirthankara)**

**Explanation of Each Term in the Sutra**

**Asrava of Nichagotra (Low Caste)**

**Explanation of Each Term in the Sutra**

**Asrava of Ucchagotra (High Caste)**

**Explanation of Each Term in the Sutra**

**Asrava of Antaraya Karma (Karma of Obstacles)**

**Explanation of the Asrava of Tatpradosh etc. (Karma of Obstacles) and Avoiding the Defects Arising from It**

**Explanation of Vrata (Vow)**

**253**

**254**

**The Special Nature of the Results of Violence etc. and How to Avoid Them**

**254**

**The Purpose of Arranging the Terms "Hinsa" (Violence) etc. in Order**

**The Reason for Not Mentioning Ratribhojan (Night Meal) Vrata Separately**

**254**

**255**

**255**

**Chapter 7**

**The Two Types of Vrata**

**Explanation of Each Term**

**The Sutra on the Five-Five Feelings for the Stability of Vrata**

**The Five Feelings of Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence)**

**The Five Feelings of Satya Vrata (Vow of Truthfulness)**

**257**

**257**

**257**

**257**

**257**

**258**

**258**

**258**

**258**

**258**

**259**

**259**

**259**

**259**

**200**

**260**

**260**

**260**

**261**

**261**

**262**

**262**

**262**

**262**

**263**

**264**

**264**

**265**

**265**

**265**

**2 5**

**266**

**266**

**266**

Page #113:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

[103 Anuveechi Bhashan Padka Arth
266 Moorcheeko Parigrah Manne Par Baahya Padarth Parigrah Achouryavratki Paanch Bhavanaen 266 Kaise Hain Is Baatka Vichar
274 Prateek Padki Vyakhya 267 Vratika Swaroop
275 Brahmacharya Vratki Paanch Bhavanaen 267 Shalya Padki Vyakhya V Uske Bhed
275 Parigrahtyaag Vratki Paanch Bhavanaen 267 Shalya Ke Tino Bhedon Ki Vyakhya
275 Hisaadikmen Apay Aur Avdydarshanka Upadesh 268 Ni:shalya Ko Vratikahane Ka Prayojan 275 Hinsaadik Kaise Apay Aur Avdy Hain Iska Vratik Ke Do Bhed
276 Vistaarse Vivechan 268 Agar Padka Arth
276 Hinsaadik Du:kh Hi Hain Is Bhavanaka Upadesh 268 Munike Shoonya Agar Aadimen Rahne Par Agarihinsaadik Du:kh Kaise Hain Iska Vistaarse Vivechan 269 Pan Prapt Hota Hai Aur Grihasth Ke Ghar Chhod' Lokkalyankari Maitri Aadi Char Bhavanaen 269 Dene Par Angaripan Prapt Hota Hai Is Shankaka Maitri Aadi Padki Vyakhya 270 Parihaar
276 Sanveg Aur Vairagy Ke Liye Jagat Aur Kay Ke Agari Ke Pure Vrat Nahin Hone Se Vah Vratik Kaise Hai Swabhaav Ka Chintan 270 Is Baatka Vichar
276 Lokka Aakar 270 Agari Ki Vyakhya
277 Jagat Aur Kay Ke Swabhaav Ka Kis Prakar Agari Ke Vraton Ko Anu Kahne Ka Prayojan 277 Vichar Kare
270 Agari Kis Prakar Ki Hinsa Ka Tyagi Hota Hai 277 Hisaki Vyakhya
271 Ahinsa Aadi Paanch Anuvraton Ki Vyakhya 277 Prammatyogpadki Sarthakta
271 Agari Anya Kin Gunon Se Sampann Hota Hai. Pranon Ka Viyog Na Hone Par Hinsa Hoti Hai
Iska Vichar
278 Is Baatka Ullekh 271 Digviriti Vratki Vyakhya
278 Anrutki Vyakhya
272 Deshaavriti Vratki Vyakhya Asat Aur Anrut Padki Vyakhya
272 Anarthdandka Arth Hinsakar Vachan Hi Anrut Hai Is Baatka
Anarthdand Ke Paanch Bhed Aur Unki Vyakhya 278 Khulasa 272 Samayik Ki Vyakhya
279 Steyki Vyakhya 272 Proshdh V Upvaas Shabdka Arth
279 Aadan Padka Arth 272 Proshdhopavaaski Vyakhya
279 Karm Aur Nokarmka Grahan Stey Kyon Nahin Hai Upbhogparibhogki Vyakhya
280 Iska Vichar
273 Madhu Aadi Ke Saprayojan Tyag Ka Upadesh 280 Bhikshu Ke Bhraman Karte Samay Rathaadvaar Mein Pravesh Ketki Aadi Ke Phool V Sadharan Vanaspati Ke. Karne Se Chori Kyon Nahin Hoti Iska Vichar 273 Saprayojan Tyag Ka Upadesh -
280 Abrahmki Vyakhya
273 Yaan Vaahan Aadi Ke Parimaan Karne Ka Upadesh 280 Mithun Padka Arth
273 Atithi Padki Vyakhya Sab Karm Maithun Kyon Nahin Hai Iska Khulasa 273 Atithisan Vibhaag Ke Char Bhed
280 Brahmpadki Vyakhya 274 Grihasth Ka Sallekhana Dharm
280 Parigrahki Vyakhya
274 Maran Padki Vyakhya Moorche Padka Arth 274 Sallekhana Padka Arth
280 Mool Padse Vaatadi Prakopjanaya Moochhi Ka Grahan Sutra Mein 'Joshita' Pad Rakhne Ka Karan. .. 281 Kyon Nahin Kiya Is Baatka Khulasa 274 Sallekhana Aatmavadh Nahin Hai Is Baatka Samarthan 281
278
278
280
280
]

Page #114:
---------------------------
## Chapter 8: The Cause of Bondage

**104]**

* **Five transgressions in the right view:** The difference between praise and commendation.
* **Why are there only five transgressions when there are eight limbs of right view?** The reason for this.
* **The authority sutra for the five transgressions in vows and conduct.**
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-violence:** Explanation of each term, including bondage.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of truthfulness:** Explanation of each term, including false teachings.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-stealing:** Explanation of each term, including theft.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-attachment to possessions:** Explanation of each term, including marriage outside the faith.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-possession:** Explanation of each term, including the vow of non-possession.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-wandering:** Explanation of each term, including wandering in the wrong direction.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-wandering in the world:** Explanation of each term, including wandering in the wrong place.
* **Explanation of the term "self".**
* **The reason for the special qualities in giving.**
* **Explanation of the term "special method".**
* **Explanation of "special method" and other terms.**
* **The attainment of all goals.**

**282**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**282**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**282**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**287**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**287**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**287**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**287**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**287**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**284**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**285**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**285**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**285**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**286**

* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.
* **Five transgressions of the vow of non-acceptance of gifts:** Explanation of each term, including acceptance.

**282**

* **Two types of wrong view and their explanation.**
* **Four or five types of wrong view for the purpose of teaching others and their explanation.**

**283**

* **Explanation of the types of wrong view.**
* **Sub-types of the wrong view of action.**
* **Twelve types of non-restraint.**
* **Twenty-five types of passions.**
* **Sub-types of mental application.**
* **Many types of carelessness.**

**283**

* **Consideration of how many causes of bondage are there in each state of being.**
* **Explanation of bondage.**
* **Explanation of the term "giving".**
* **Meaning of the term "grace".**
* **What is self-benefit and what is benefit to others

Page #115:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**311** Explanation of the three types of Darshanamohaniya, their causes, and their original natures, experienced firsthand.
**300** Explanation of all types of Charitramohaniya, except for some karmas, experienced firsthand.
**312** Four types of Ayukarma.
**303** Experienced according to the name of one's karma.
**312** Explanation of the causes of Ayavyapadesha and the four types of Ayus.
**303** Explanation of Nirjara and its types.
**312** Explanation of the sub-types of Namakarma.
**303** Significance of the word 'Cha'.
**312** Explanation of Gati and its types.
**303** Detailed explanation of Anubhagabandh through special meaning.
**313** Explanation of Jati and its types.
**304** Explanation of Pradeshbandh.
**315** Explanation of Sharir Namakarma and its types.
**304** Puny (Meritorious) Natures.
**316** Explanation of Angopang and its types.
**304** Explanation of the creation of Puny Natures and its types.
**304** Pap (Demeritorious) Natures.
**317** Explanation of Bandhan (Bondage).
**304** Explanation of the aggregation of Pap Natures.
**304** Explanation of Sansthan and its six types.
**304** Explanation of Sanhanan and its six types.
**304** Explanation of the twenty, starting with Sparsha (Touch).
**305** The nature of Sanvar (Purification).
**318** Explanation of Anupurvya (Sequential) and its four types.
**305** Two types of Sanvar and their characteristics.
**318** Explanation of other types besides the aforementioned ones.
**306** How many types of Gotra (Lineage) karmas are purified in which Gunasthan (Stage of Purity) and by what means.
**318** Explanation of high and low Gotras.
**307** Reasons for Sanvar.
**320** Five types of Antaraya (Obstruction) karma.
**308** Functions of Gupti, Samiti, Dharma, Anupreksha, and Parishadana Antaraya.
**321** The nature of Jaya (Victory).
**321** Significance of the word 'Sah' in the sutra, etc.
**321** Three karmas and the superior position of Antaraya karma.
**309** Indication of Tap (Austerity) as the cause of Sanvar and Nirjara.
**321** Tap is included in Dharma, yet the reason for mentioning it separately.
**309** Superior position of Mohaniya karma.
**321** Tap is the cause of Abhyudaya (Progress), Svarga (Heaven), etc., yet the reason for mentioning it separately.
**309** Superior position of Mohaniya karma.
**321** Resolution of the doubt about how Tap is the cause of Nirjara.
**309** Superior position of Gotra karma.
**321** The nature of Gupti.
**322** Superior position of Ayukarma.
**310** Explanation of the word 'Nigraha'.
**322** Superior position of Ayukarma.
**310** Significance of the word 'Samyak'.
**322** Inferior position of Vedaniya karma.
**310** Indication of how Gupti is the cause of Sanvar.
**322** Inferior position of Nama and Gotra karma.
**310** Five types of Samiti.
**322** Inferior position of the remaining karmas.
**311** Indication of how Samiti is the cause of Sanvar.
**323** Explanation of Anubhagabandh.
**311** Ten types of Dharma.
**323** Explanation of the word 'Vipak'.
**311** The purpose of mentioning Gupti, Samiti, and Dharma as the cause of Sanvar.
**323** Two types of experience.
**311** Two types of tendencies of experience.
**323** The nature of the ten Dharmas, starting with Kshama (Forgiveness).
**307** 
**308** 
**308**

Page #116:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**[106]**

**323**
The statement of the difference between truth and language in the committee, how these ten Dharmas are the cause of Samvara, this is the consideration.
**324**
The process of contemplating the twelve Anuprekshaas, like Anitya, etc.
**324**
The two types of Nirjara and their explanation, how these Anuprekshaas are the cause of Samvara, this is the consideration.
**324**
The purpose of placing Anuprekshaas in the middle of the causes of Samvara.
**324**
The etymology and purpose of Pariksha.
**324**
How Parikshajay Samvara and Nirjara are the cause, this is the consideration.
**324**
The names of Parikshaas.
**324**
The instruction on who has eleven Parikshaas.
**324**
The instruction on who has eleven Parikshaas as a cause.
**324**
The instruction on why those who do not have the rise of Mohaniya are still said to have eleven Parikshaas.
**324**
Sarvarthasiddhi.
**324**
The information about the Adhyahara of the word 'Na Santi', the instruction on who has all the Parikshaas of Badarsamparaya.
**324**
The separate consideration of how to conquer the twenty-two Pariyas like Kshudha, etc.
**330**
The instruction on how Samvara happens by enduring the Parikshaas through the aforementioned method.
**336**
The meaning of the word Badarsamparaya.
**336**
The instruction on which Charitras have all the Parikshaas possible.
**337**
The instruction on the two Parigrahas that happen in the rise of Jnanaavaran.
**324**
**327**
**337**
The instruction on the fourteen Parikshaas of Sukshmasamparaya and the Chhadmastha Vitraga.
**337**
The removal of the doubt on why the Parikshaas of the Sukshmasamparaya Jiva are not the cause of the rise of Moha.
**337**
The consideration on which expectation these fourteen Parikshaas of the aforementioned Jivas happen.
**328**
**329**
**329**
**329**
**330**
**337**
**337**
**338**
**338**
**339**
**339**
**339**
**340**
The consideration on how Prajna Parivah happens in the rise of Jnanaavaran.
**340**
The instruction on the Parikshaas that happen in the rise of Darshanmoha and Antaraya.
**340**
The instruction on the Parivahas that happen in the rise of Charitramoha.
**340**
The consideration on how Nishadya Paripah happens in the rise of Charitramoha.
**340**
The consideration on the Parikshaas that happen in the rise of Vedaniya.
**340**
The consideration on how many Parikshaas a Jiva has at the same time.
**340**
The consideration on why a Jiva has nineteen Pariyas at the same time.
**340**
The consideration on how Prajna and Ajnana Paripah happen together.
**340**
The five types of Charitra.
**340**
The purpose of taking Charitra separately, the two types of Samayik Charitra and their explanation.
**341**
The nature of Chhedopasthapanacharitra.
**341**
The nature of Pariharavishuddhicharitra.
**342**
The nature of Sukshmasamparaya Charitra.
**342**
The nature of Athakhyata Charitra and the meaning of the word 'Ath'.
**342**
The logical instruction on why the other name of Athakhyata is Yathakyata.
**342**
The meaning of the word 'Iti'.
**343**
The meaning of the Anupurvi Kachan of Samayik, etc.
**343**
The six types of Bahir Tap.
**343**
The explanation of Anashan, etc. and the purpose of its statement.
**343**
The instruction on what the difference is between Pariksha and Kayaklesh.
**343**
The purpose of calling it Bahir Tap.
**343**
The six types of Antaranga Tap.
**343**
The explanation of Prayashchit, etc.
**343**
The sub-types of the remaining five Antaranga Taps, excluding Dhyan.
**344**
**344**
**344**
**345**
**345**
**345**
**345**
**346**
**346**
**346**

Page #117:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**1107**
* Nine types of Prāyaścitta (atonement) 346
* Four types of Raudra-dhyāna (meditation on anger) and their masters 346
* Explanation of nine types of Ālocanā (criticism) etc. 346
* How Raudra-dhyāna occurs for a Deśa-saṁyata (one who has restrained the senses) 348
* Four types of Vinaya-tapa (penance of restraint) 348
* Consideration of the matter 348
* Explanation of four types of Jñāna-vinaya (penance of knowledge) etc. 348
* Reason for the absence of Raudra-dhyāna in a Saṁyata (one who has restrained the senses) 348
* Ten types of Vaiyāvṛtya-tapa (penance of change) 348
* Four types of Dharmya-dhyāna (meditation on righteousness) 348
* Etymology of the term Viṣaya-pada (object of sense) 348
* Explanation of terms like Ācārya (teacher) etc. 348
* Explanation of four types of Ājñā-vicaya (investigation of commands) etc. 349
* Five types of Svādhyāya-tapa (penance of self-study) 349
* Masters of the four types of Dhabdhyāna (meditation on sound) 349
* Explanation of terms like Vācanā (reading) etc. and their purpose 349
* Emergence of Kama (desire) and Udeeranā (stimulation) through special meaning 349
* Two types of Vyutsarga-tapa (penance of renunciation) 349
* Special examination 349
* Etymology of the term Vyutsarga and indication of its types 349
* Two types of Śukla-dhyāna (white meditation) are for Pūrva-vid (one who has knowledge of the past) 357
* Types of external Upādhi (conditions) 349
* Meaning of the term Pūrva-vid 349
* Types of internal Upādhi 357
* Dharmya-dhyāna occurs before Śreṇī-ārohaṇa (ascending the order of knowledge) 349
* Purpose of Vyutsarga-tapa 349
* Śukla-dhyāna occurs afterwards 357
* User, nature, and time duration of this meditation 350
* Indication of the matter 350
* Three types of Saṁhanana (concentration) are superior 357
* Indication of the matter 350
* Two types of Śukla-dhyāna are for Kevali (omniscient) 357
* These three are the means of meditation 357
* Names of the four types of Śukla-dhyāna, which are the means of liberation 350
* Indication of the matter that the first Saṁhanana is the only one 350
* Masters of the four types of Śukla-dhyāna 350
* Statement of the special feature in the two types of Śukla-dhyāna 350
* Explanation of the term Ekāgra-cintā-nirodha (concentration of thought) 358
* Meaning of the term Ekāśraya (one-based) 358
* Removal of the defect 358
* Four types of meditation 358
* Indication of the matter that the second Śukla-dhyāna is Avi-cāra (non-reflection) 350
* Explanation of terms like Ārta (afflicted) etc. 351
* Meaning of the word Vitarka (reflection) 351
* Explanation of the term Vicāra (consideration) 351
* Indication of the matter why there are two types of Vicāra in each of the four types of meditation 351
* Explanation of terms like Artha (meaning), Vyañjana (suggestion), Yoga (union), and Saṁkrānti (transition) 351
* The last two types of meditation are for liberation 351
* How the term "para" (other) indicates the last two types of meditation 359
* Example of Artha-saṁkrānti (transition of meaning) 359
* Types of Vyañjana-saṁkrānti (transition of suggestion) 359
* Types of Yoga-saṁkrānti (transition of union) 359
* Characteristic of the first type of Ārta-dhyāna (meditation on affliction) 352
* Explanation of the term Amanojña (unpleasant) 359
* Characteristic of the second type of Ārta-dhyāna 352
* Indication of the matter for which and when a Muni (ascetic) meditates on Pṛthaktva-vitarka (reflection on separateness) 352
* Indication of the matter for which and when a Muni meditates on Ekatva-vitarka (reflection on oneness) 352
* Indication of the matter for which and when a Muni meditates on Sūkṣma-kriyā-pratipāti (meditation on subtle action) 352
* Indication of the matter for which and when a Muni meditates on Vyucchinnā-kriyā-nivati (meditation on interrupted action) 353
* Masters of the four types of Ārta-dhyāna 353
* Explanation of terms like Avi-rata (uninterrupted) etc. 360
* Indication of the matter that the first three types of meditation are for all, but not for Nidāna-pramatta-saṁyata (one who is careless in the cause) 361
* Indication of the matter that the direct cause of liberation is 353
* 361
* 359

Page #118:
---------------------------
##  [108]
**Sarvarth Siddhi**

This section provides guidance on the order in which the absence of effort-achievable (yatnasadhya) things occurs for a liberated muni, upon attaining the cause of liberation (moksha). 361

It also explains how liberation is achieved through the absence of certain emotions, along with the practice of both types of tapas (austerities) and nirjara (purification). 361, 368

The section further explores the different levels of nirjara (purification) for different individuals. 370

It explains the cause of attaining the state of bhavya (worthy of liberation) and the countless qualities that are present in liberation. 361, 370

The section also provides a detailed explanation of the absence of certain emotions in liberation and the five types of nirgrantha (liberated beings). 361, 370

It discusses the infinite strength (virya) and other qualities present in liberation, and explains the meaning of terms like pulaka (a state of bliss). 363, 370

The section addresses the question of the size of liberated beings and explains why they are not as large as the loka-akasha (the space of the universe). 363

It also explains the different types of nirgrantha based on their practice of restraint (samyama), knowledge (shruta), service (pratisevana), and other factors. 364, 371

The section discusses the movement of liberated beings beyond the loka-anta (the boundary of the universe) and the reasons behind it. 364

It provides examples to support the reasons for this movement. 364, 365

The section explains the reasons for the movement beyond the loka-anta and the different types of liberated beings based on their field (kshetra), etc. 365

It also explains the two types of nayas (perspectives) used in this discussion and the different types of liberated beings based on their location (sthana), time (kala), and other factors. 365, 373

The tenth chapter discusses the different types of liberated beings based on their movement (gati). 373

It explains the cause of the emergence of kevalgyan (omniscience) and the sign (linga) of karma-kshaya (destruction of karma). 373

The section also explains the different types of liberated beings based on their tirtha (spiritual teacher), charitra (conduct), buddhi (intellect), jnana (knowledge), avagahan (understanding), and other factors. 367, 374

It explains why moha (delusion) is destroyed first and the order in which it is destroyed. 367

The section discusses the destruction of the remaining karma, such as jnana-avaran (knowledge-obscuring karma), in a kshina-kashaya (one with diminished passions) and the order in which it is destroyed. 367

It also explains the different types of liberated beings based on their number (sankhya). 374

The section explains the nature of liberation with reasons and the different types of liberated beings based on their kshetra (field), etc. 368, 374

It explains the meaning of the term "Sarvarth Siddhi" and the absence of effort-achievable things for different types of liberated beings. 368, 375

The section concludes with a praise of the Veerajina (the liberated ones). 375

Page #119:
---------------------------
Glossary of the texts mentioned in the comments:

Prathyanaama
Symbol
Text Name
Symbol
Anekanta Naamaavali, Ananya Prati, Aacharaanga Niyukti, Aaraadhanaa Prati, Gommathasaara Karmakanda, Gommathasaara Jeevakanda, Jeevaadhikaara Chulika, Jainendrya Vyaakarana, Taadapatreya Prati 1, Tattvaartha Vaartika, Delhi Prati 1, Delhi Prati 2, Dhavala Prati, Abhidhaaraabhirata Taadapatreya Prati 2, Nyaayabhaashya, Nyaayabindu Tika, Nyaayasutra, Paribhaashendusekhara, Parikshaamukha
Muula, Muulaachaara, Yuktyanu, Yogabhaashya
Pramaanavaaritkaalaṃkaara, Pravachanasaara, Kshetra Prashasta Paada Bhaashya, Vyomavati Tika, Baaraha Anuprekshhaa, Baarhaspatya Bhaashya (Sarvaarthsiddhi), Muulaachaara, Yuktyanuśaasana, Yogabhaashya, Yogamuula
Ratnakaranda Visheshhaavashyaka Bhaashya, Vishuddhi Marga, Sanmatitarka, Samayapraabhruta, Sarvaarthsiddhi
Tattvaartha Dipa 1, Dipa 2, Dhavala Prati, Abhidhaaraabhirata Taadapatreya Prati, Nyaayabhaashya, Nyaayabindu Tika
Yogasutra
Ratna Visheshhaavashyaka Bhaashya, Vishuddhi Marga, Sanmati, Samayapraabhruta
Nyaayasutra
Parishesha, Paaṭha Mukha, Paaṭha, Paaṭha Mukha Bhaashya, Paaṭha Yogasutra, Panchaadhikarana
Sarvaarthsiddhi, Siddhadvaatrinshatikaa, Saundaraananda, Saankhyakaumudi
Pataṃjali Mahaabhaashya, Pataṃjala Yogasutra, Panchsaṃgraha (Shvetaambara)
Adhyaaya
Page
Verse
Sloka
Sutra

Page #120:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #121:
---------------------------
**The Sarvarthasiddhi Composed by the Venerable Acharya**

**Chapter One**

I bow down to the one who is the guide of the path to liberation, the destroyer of the mountains of karma, the mother of all universal principles, for the attainment of such qualities.

1. A certain worthy soul, who was close to liberation, wise, and desirous of his own welfare, went to a secluded hermitage, a place of rest for worthy beings, which was extremely pleasant. There, in the midst of an assembly of monks, he saw a great Acharya, who was like a living embodiment of the path to liberation, even though he did not speak. He was skilled in logic and scripture, and his primary work was to teach the welfare of others. He was worthy of being served by noble souls. This worthy soul approached the Acharya with humility and asked, "O Venerable One, what is the welfare of the soul?" The Acharya replied, "The welfare of the soul is liberation." The worthy soul then asked, "What is the nature of liberation, and what is the means of attaining it?" The Acharya said, "When the soul is completely free from the stains of karma, both subtle and gross, and from the body, then the state that arises, which is characterized by its inconceivable, inherent qualities of knowledge, etc., and by uninterrupted bliss, is called liberation."

82. Because liberation is extremely subtle, those who are ignorant and claim to be Tirthankaras describe its nature in a completely different way, using words that are based on false logic and do not touch upon its true nature. For example, (1. Samkhya) the nature of the Purusha is consciousness, which is the object of knowledge.

Page #122:
---------------------------
2]
"All-purpose accomplishment is the goal, but the means are not clear." This is a statement that is both true and false, because it is without form. "The destruction of the qualities of intellect, etc., is the liberation of the soul." This is also a false assumption, because there is no such thing as a thing without a specific characteristic. "The extinction of the lamp is the extinction of the soul." This is also a false assumption, because it is like the idea of a donkey having horns, which is a mere figment of the imagination. We will discuss the true nature of this in the next chapter.
83. They also disagree about the means of attaining it. Some say that liberation is attained through knowledge alone, without any need for conduct. Others say that it is attained through faith alone. Still others say that it is attained through conduct alone, without any need for knowledge. But just as the mere knowledge, faith, or conduct of a medicine is not a means of curing a disease for a sick person, so too, knowledge, etc., are not means of attaining liberation.
The knowledge is absent. But such consciousness, being the true nature, is also false, because if one believes this, it does not acquire any form, i.e., its own nature, as a characteristic of its own activity. (2. Vaisheshika) The destruction of the special qualities of intellect, etc., is the liberation of the soul. But this assumption is also inappropriate, because there is no such thing as a thing without a specific characteristic. (3. Buddhist) Just as a lamp goes out, so too, the extinction of the soul's offspring is liberation. But just as a donkey's horns are only a matter of imagination and not a real thing, so too, this kind of liberation is only a matter of imagination and not a real thing. This is evident from their own statements. And so on. We will discuss the faultless nature of this liberation later (in the tenth chapter, verse 2).
83. In the same way, these proponents also argue about the subject of its attainment. Some believe that (1) liberation is attained through knowledge independent of conduct. Others believe that (2) liberation is attained through faith alone. And others believe that (3) liberation is attained through conduct independent of knowledge. But just as the mere knowledge, faith, or conduct of a medicine is not a means of curing a disease for a sick person, so too, separate knowledge, etc., are not means of attaining liberation.
Special Note - What has been explained so far is the essence of the Tattvartha Sutra and its first verse. It first points out the reason for its composition. The intention is that a certain soul, in search of the welfare of the soul, went to a secluded and pleasant hermitage and there, in the assembly of the monks, asked a question of the Nirgrantha Acharya. From this, the Tattvartha Sutra was composed. This is also confirmed by the introduction given at the beginning of the Tattvartha Vartika. But there, after pointing out the first verse, another meaning is also mentioned. It is stated there that others explain the composition of the Tattvartha Sutra in this way: "The power of men is declining here, so in order to reveal the process of the principles, the composition of the scriptures begins in a sequential order in relation to the instruction of the path of liberation, and the verse "Samyagdarshanjnanacharitrani mokshamargah" is said." Here, the disciple and the teacher 1. Mouth. That a. 2. - because of the donkey's horns. Increase Mu. 3. 'The complete destruction of the special qualities of the soul is liberation - Prash. Vyo. p. 638 1 4. And so on. That also Di. 1 a. 1 5. In which there is no birth, no old age, no death, no disease, no unpleasant contact. There is no desire for the loss of the beloved, no separation from the beloved, that is the abode of peace, eternal and unshakable. Just as a lamp, when it is extinguished, does not go to the forest, nor to the sky. It does not go to any direction, nor to any direction, it only goes to peace because of the loss of attachment. Saundarya 16 27-29. 'The extinction of the lamp is the liberation of his mind.' - Vartikaalam. 11451 6. - like the horns of a donkey, imagination A., Di. 1 a. Mu. 7.  like. Thus, the knowledge, etc., are reversed
Di. 1, Di. 2 Mu. 1

Page #123:
---------------------------
## Chapter One

The connection is not intended, but the Acharya's desire was to liberate beings immersed in the ocean of existence. However, without the teachings of the path to liberation, their welfare cannot be taught. Therefore, this scripture was composed with the desire to explain the path to liberation. It seems that by this mention, the Tattvarthavartika-kara has indicated the Uththānika of the Tattvarthādhigamabhāṣya. In the Tattvarthādhigamabhāṣya, an Uththānika of the same meaning is found. Śrutaśāgara Sūri has also stated the same in his Śrutaśāgarī, that at the request of a disciple, the Acharya composed the Tattvartha Sutra. In it, the disciple's name is given as Dvyaka. From this, it appears that the main intention of the Sarvarthasiddhi is that the Tattvartha Sutra was composed at the behest of a disciple. Further, the discussion of liberation in the Uththānika has briefly examined the essence of liberation. The rule is that due to karma, the actions that occur, the soul's oneness and the understanding of what is desirable and undesirable, lead to existence. Therefore, when karma, bhavakarma and nokarma are separated from the soul, the state of the soul's natural state of happiness, free from obstacles, with its own knowledge and other qualities, is called liberation. This is proven. However, other proponents are unable to analyze the essence of liberation in this way. Pujyapada Swami has presented three examples from the mouth of Gṛddhipiccha Acharya, the author of the Tattvartha Sutra, through which the essence of liberation is presented incorrectly. From this context, the first examination of the Sankhya doctrine is done. Although the Sankhyas have considered the permanent removal of the three types of suffering - spiritual, physical and divine - as liberation, yet they consider the soul to be of a conscious nature, but also devoid of knowledge. Their belief is that although the dharma of knowledge is of nature, due to contact, the Purusha experiences himself as knowledgeable and nature experiences itself as conscious. Therefore, here, instead of criticizing the Sankhya's essence of liberation, the Purusha essence has been criticized and declared false. The second view is that of the Vaisheshikas. The Vaisheshikas, although they have accepted the special qualities of knowledge, etc., in the soul through the relationship of samavaya, yet they consider their separation from the soul as its liberation. They have stated that the origin of special qualities like intellect, etc., is due to the non-samavaya cause, which is the union of the soul and mind. In the state of liberation, since there is no union of the soul and mind, therefore, there is a complete absence of special qualities there. In their view, the special qualities of all pervasive substances are considered momentary, therefore, they do not consider it an objection that there is an absence of special qualities like knowledge, etc., in liberation. Now, if in the liberated state, the soul is considered devoid of knowledge, etc., like attachment and aversion, then the soul does not stand as an independent substance, because a thing that does not have any kind of special characteristic cannot be a thing. This is the reason why their belief has also been declared false. The third view is that of the Buddhists. In the Buddhists, there are two types of nirvana - Sopadhisheṣa and Nirupadhisheṣa. In Sopadhisheṣa nirvana, only the destruction of the ātravas in the form of ignorance, craving, etc., takes place, the pure stream of consciousness remains. But in Nirupadhisheṣa nirvana, even the stream of consciousness is destroyed. Here, keeping in mind this second aspect of liberation, its examination has been done. In this regard, the Buddhists say that just as a lamp, when extinguished, does not go up, down, right, left, forward, backward, but remains quiet there, in the same way, the end of the soul's offspring is its liberation. After this, the soul's offspring does not continue, it remains quiet there. While examining this essence of the Buddhists, the Acharya has stated that their imagination is false.

Page #124:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

[1118484. What then? It is said that these three are combined:
Right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct are the path to liberation. ||1|| $5. The word "samyak" is either un-derived or derived. From the root "añc" with the suffix "kvip" and the prefix "sam", the word "samyak" is formed. Its meaning is praise. It should be combined with each of the words: faith, knowledge, and conduct. Thus, we have right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. We will explain their nature in detail later on, in terms of their characteristics and distinctions. Here, we are only mentioning the purpose: the word "samyak" is used as a qualifier for faith, for the purpose of collecting faith based on the true knowledge of the objects. To know the objects in the same way as they exist, including the soul, is right knowledge. The word "samyak" is used as a qualifier for knowledge, for the purpose of removing delusion, doubt, and wrong knowledge. Right conduct is the cessation of actions that are the cause of the acquisition of karma, for the person who is striving to remove the causes of the cycle of birth and death. The word "samyak" is used as a qualifier for conduct, for the purpose of removing conduct based on ignorance.
6. Seeing or just the act of seeing is faith. Knowing or just the act of knowing is knowledge.

In this way, after examining the principles of liberation in brief, the Acharya has examined the principles of its cause. In this context, it is only necessary to write that most people of different views believe that liberation is achieved through one or the other of faith, knowledge, and conduct. Whether it is the Samkhya, the Buddhists, or the Vaisheshikas, all of them have considered true knowledge or wisdom as the main means of liberation. The path of devotion or chanting of the name is another form of faith. There is also a strong group that considers chanting of the name as the main means of liberation from the cycle of birth and death. This group is becoming increasingly powerful. To chant the name of one's chosen deity is another form of it. But just as the cure of a disease cannot be achieved by just one cause, such as seeing the medicine, similarly, liberation cannot be achieved by just one of these. Then what is the means of achieving liberation? This question remains. To answer this question, the Acharya has composed the first sutra. He says:
Right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, these three together are the path to liberation. ||1||
85. The word "samyak" is un-derived, i.e., a root word, and derived, i.e., grammatically formed. When it is derived grammatically, it is formed by adding the suffix "kvip" to the root "añc" with the prefix "sam". In Sanskrit, its derivation is "sam añcati iti samyak". In Prakrit, its meaning is praise. It should be combined with each of the words: faith, knowledge, and conduct. Thus, we have right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. We will explain their nature in detail later on, in terms of their characteristics and distinctions. Here, we are only mentioning the name: the word "samyak" is used as a qualifier for faith, for the purpose of collecting faith based on the true knowledge of the objects. To know the objects in the same way as they exist, including the soul, is right knowledge. The word "samyak" is used as a qualifier for knowledge, for the purpose of removing delusion (lack of conviction), doubt, and wrong knowledge. Right conduct is the cessation of actions that are the cause of the acquisition of karma, for the person who is striving to remove the causes of the cycle of birth and death. The word "samyak" is used as a qualifier for conduct, for the purpose of removing conduct based on ignorance. 1. -gिति. कोऽस्या- दि. 1। 2. -च्यते । पदार्थानां याथा. मु. 3. ज्ञानम्। अनध्यवसाय सं.मु.। 4. -दानमिति तत्कियो- दि, 2। 5. -षणम् । स्वयं पश्य- मु.। -षणम् । यस्मादिति पश्यदि, 1. दि.2। 6. -श्यतेऽनेनेति दृष्टि- मु.। 7. ज्ञाप्तिमात्र मु.। ज्ञानमात्र दि. 21
]

Page #125:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: Knowledge

**11187]**

**The term "Darshan" (perception) refers to that which sees, is seen by, or is the act of seeing itself. The term "Jnana" (knowledge) refers to that which knows, is known by, or is the act of knowing itself. The term "Charitra" (conduct) refers to that which acts, is acted upon, or is the act of acting itself.**

**Doubt:** If we derive the meaning of these terms in this way, then the doer and the instrument become one, which is contradictory.

**Resolution:** While this statement is true, it is made with the intention of distinguishing between the effect and the cause. For example, the statement "Fire burns fuel by the effect of burning" is made with the intention of distinguishing between the fire and the fuel. Similarly, in the case of synonyms and their meanings, there is a concept of both oneness and multiplicity. Therefore, the intention of distinguishing between self-reliance and dependence does not lead to a contradiction in the same object. Just as the act of burning, etc., is attributed to fire as the doer, etc., so should it be understood in this case.

**7. Doubt:** In the sutra, it is appropriate to first consider knowledge, because perception is preceded by knowledge, and the word "knowledge" has fewer syllables than the word "perception."

**Resolution:** It is not appropriate to say that perception is preceded by knowledge, and therefore knowledge should be considered first in the sutra, because perception and knowledge arise simultaneously. Just as the brilliance and light of the sun are revealed simultaneously when the cloud cover disappears, so too, when the suppression, destruction, or suppression of destruction of the obscurations of perception occurs, the soul manifests as right perception, and at the same time, the elimination of wrong knowledge and scriptural knowledge, and right knowledge and scriptural knowledge are revealed. Secondly, there is a rule that in a sutra, the word with fewer syllables is placed before the word with more syllables. Therefore, the word "perception" is placed before the word "knowledge."

**Doubt:** Why is right perception considered more important?

**Resolution:** Because right perception is the cause of the correct designation of knowledge. Conduct is preceded by knowledge, because conduct is preceded by knowledge.

Page #126:
---------------------------
## The Liberation of All (Sarvarthasiddhi)

**[112 88$8.** Liberation is the complete detachment from all karmas. The path to attain it is called the path. The singular form 'path' is used to indicate that all paths together constitute the path to liberation. This eliminates the possibility of individual paths leading to liberation. Therefore, right faith (samyakdarshan), right knowledge (samyakgyan), and right conduct (samyakcharitra) together constitute the direct path to liberation. - **8 9.** To explain the characteristics of right faith, which was mentioned earlier, the following is stated:

**Faith in the true nature of things is right faith. ||2||**

**$10.** The word 'tattva' (true nature) refers to the general nature of things. How? The word 'tat' (that) is a pronoun, and pronouns refer to general things. The nature of 'tat' is 'tattva'. What is 'tat'? It means the state of being as it is.

Page #127:
---------------------------
## Chapter One: The Meaning of Tattvartha

**112 (12)**

The meaning of the word "Tattvartha" is established as follows: "Tattvena arthaḥ tattvarthaḥ" (Tattvartha is the meaning of the truth). Alternatively, it can be understood as "bhaavena bhaavavato'bhidhaanam" (the expression of the essence through the essence itself), as the essence is inseparable from the essence. Therefore, "tattvameva arthaḥ tattvarthaḥ" (the truth itself is the meaning of the truth). 

The faith in Tattvartha is called "Tattvartha-shraddhaan" and it is to be understood as "samyag-darshan" (right perception). The Tattvartha, which will be discussed further, includes the soul (jiva) and other entities.

**11.**

**Doubt:** Since the word "darshan" is derived from the root "drish" which means "light," how can it be used to denote faith?

**Resolution:** Roots have multiple meanings. Therefore, there is no fault in interpreting the root "drish" as "shraddhaan" (faith).

**Doubt:** Why is the common meaning of "drish" (light) abandoned here?

**Resolution:** Because this is a discussion of the path to liberation (moksha). Faith in Tattvartha is a transformation of the soul and is considered a means to liberation, as it is found only in the worthy souls (bhavyas). Light, however, is caused by the eyes and other senses, and is common to all beings in the cycle of birth and death. Therefore, it is not appropriate to consider it as the path to liberation.

**12.**

**Doubt:** Would it be sufficient to simply say "artha-shraddhaan" (faith in meaning) in the sutra?

**Resolution:** This would lead to the inclusion of all meanings of the word "artha," such as wealth, purpose, and object of expression, which is not appropriate. Therefore, the sutra does not simply say "artha-shraddhaan."

**Doubt:** Should we then only accept "tattva-shraddhaan" (faith in truth)?

**Resolution:** This would lead to the inclusion of only the essence. Some (Vaisheshikas) interpret the word "tattva" as encompassing existence, substance, quality, and action. If the sutra were to only say "tattva-shraddhaan," it would imply that faith in all these aspects constitutes right perception, which is not correct. Alternatively, the word "tattva" can be interpreted as signifying oneness. In this case, the sutra would imply that accepting everything as one is right perception. Some have even argued that "purusha eva idam sarvam" (the soul is everything). However, this contradicts both perception and inference. Therefore, to avoid these contradictions, the sutra uses both "tattva" and "artha."

Right perception is of two types: **saraga samyag-darshan** (right perception with attachment) and **vitaraaga samyag-darshan** (right perception without attachment). The first is characterized by calmness, emotions,

Page #128:
---------------------------
## 8]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[112 12-

**Srag Samyagdarshan** is characterized by the expression of compassion, faith, etc., while **Vitrag Samyagdarshan** is the pure state of the soul.

**Special Meaning:** This sutra, while pointing out the characteristics of Samyagdarshan, explains that Samyagdarshan is the belief in the substances like the soul, etc. While explaining this sutra, the commentary mainly clarifies four points. These four points are: (1) How the word "Tattvarth" is derived by pointing out the etymological meaning of the words "Tattva" and "Artha"? (2) Why is the meaning of the root "Drish" taken as "belief"? (3) What is the benefit of accepting both the words "Tattva" and "Artha"? (4) How many types of Samyagdarshan are there and what is their nature?

Although "Tat" is a pronoun in the original text and the suffix "Tva" is used in the sense of "state", the word "Tattva" refers to the general state, and the word "Artha" refers to the substance. However, the word "Artha" has many meanings like wealth, purpose, meaning, cessation, subject, type, and object, etc. Therefore, believing in all these cannot be called Samyagdarshan. That is why the sutrakar has not included only the word "Artha" in the sutra. Similarly, the word "Tattva" has many meanings in different schools of thought. Vaisheshika people take "Tattva" as existence, substance, quality, and action. In their view, both general and particular are considered independent substances. Now, if only the word "Tattva" is included in the sutra, then believing in existence, substance, quality, and action can also be considered Samyagdarshan, which is not appropriate. Therefore, the sutrakar has not included only the word "Tattva" in the sutra. Similarly, the Parambrahmavadis have not accepted various tattvas but have considered only one tattva called Brahma. According to their view, this world is only in the form of a person. Therefore, considering this, the word "Tattva" becomes the word for one Brahma, which is not appropriate. Therefore, the sutrakar has not included only the word "Tattva" in the sutra. Here, all those substances like the soul, etc., are taken from Tattvartha, which are described in the fourth sutra. The meaning of this sutra is that believing in the ultimate reality is Samyagdarshan.

The word "Darshan" is used in Samyagdarshan. One meaning of it is "light". However, here its meaning is taken as "belief" because if the meaning of "Darshan" is taken as "light", then it is obtained by all beings due to the eye, etc., which is not appropriate in the original text. But the belief in self-interest is found only in some near-liberated beings, which is useful in the original text. Therefore, here the meaning of "Darshan" is not taken as "light" but as "belief". The intention is that the soul, which is one, undivided, and eternal in three times, is being manifested in the nine substances like the soul, etc. Therefore, the experience of this own soul is Samyagdarshan. Every soul is itself the nature of knowledge. Therefore, the experience of knowledge is the experience of the soul, and that is Samyagdarshan. This is the meaning.

Therefore, the two types of Samyagdarshan that have been mentioned - one is Srag Samyagdarshan and the other is Vitrag Samyagdarshan - are such things as calmness, emotion, compassion, and faith, which are indicative of the ultimate reality of Samyagdarshan, which is the purity of the soul. Therefore, from this perspective, they are also Samyagdarshan in practice. But those who know this as the ultimate reality are mistaken. The rule is that all those things that are synonymous with Samyagdarshan, etc., are self-evident, eternal, infinite, and always shining due to karma, and they arise only from the soul, which is the source of their own use. That is why, in error, the nature-synonymous Samyagdarshan has been called only the purity of the soul, because it does not occur in the rise of karma like falsehood, etc., but only when they are calmed, destroyed, and destroyed. It is certain that this Samyagdarshan is also found in the fourth and other gunasthanas. Therefore, the feelings of calmness, etc., which are dependent on its existence, are...

Page #129:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: 13. How does the right faith, which is the subject of the nature of the soul and its calamities, arise?

**The Sutra says:**

It arises from nature and from learning. ||3||

**Explanation:**

14. Nature means inherent disposition, and learning means understanding of the objects. The Sutra indicates both of these as causes. 

**Question:** What is the action for which these two are indicated as causes?

**Answer:** The action is "arises". Although it is not explicitly mentioned in the Sutra, it should be understood, as Sutras are always implied. 

Therefore, the meaning of this Sutra is that right faith arises from nature and from learning.

15. **Question:** Does knowledge of objects arise in right faith born of nature? If it does, then it is also born of learning, and there is no difference. If it does not, then how can one have faith in objects without knowing them?

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because the inner cause, which is the cessation, destruction, or cessation of destruction of the obscurations of right faith, is the same in both types of right faith. 

What arises without external instruction is natural right faith, and what arises with external instruction, as a result of knowing the soul and other objects, is right faith born of learning. This is the difference between the two.

16. **Question:** Why is the word "that" used in the Sutra?

**Answer:** The word "that" is used to refer to right faith, which was mentioned in the previous Sutra.

Page #130:
---------------------------
[10]
It is specified in *Sarvarthasiddhi*. Otherwise, the path of liberation would also be included, as it is related to it. But if it is argued that "the injunction or prohibition applies to the immediately preceding [statement]" and thus the understanding of right faith is established, then it is not so, because "the proximate is stronger than the distant" and thus the path of liberation would be included. Therefore, the word "that" is used.
17. Right faith is said to be the belief in the true meaning of the principles. Now, what are those principles? This is what the following sutra says: The principles are: life, non-life, inflow, bondage, restraint, outflow, and liberation. ||4||
This is what it means. In the preceding sutra, only right faith is mentioned, and it is referred to here by the word "that". If the word "that" were not used, then the path of liberation would be included, as it is the subject matter. The doubt is: "According to the rule that the injunction or prohibition applies to the immediately preceding [statement]", the understanding of right faith mentioned in the preceding sutra is self-evident, so there is no need to use the word "that" in the sutra. The solution is: No, because according to the rule "the proximate is stronger than the distant", the path of liberation would be included here. But this is not desirable, therefore the word "that" is used in the sutra.
Special Meaning - This sutra discusses the causes of the origin of right faith. In the scriptures, one of the five attainments is mentioned as the attainment of preaching. A being who has never accepted the teachings about life and non-life, etc., in the present or past life, with understanding, cannot attain right faith. But a being who has become eligible for such teachings can attain right faith either immediately or later. Here, two types of right faith are mentioned in this regard. The right faith that arises from teachings in the present is called acquired right faith, and the right faith that arises without teachings in the present is called innate right faith. This is the meaning of this sutra. Although the word "acquisition" means knowledge, in this context, it should be understood as knowledge acquired through teachings. From this, the meaning of the word "innate" becomes "without teachings". Although the inner cause of both these right faiths is the same, namely the cessation, destruction, or cessation-destruction of the obscurations of perception, there is a difference between them in terms of external teachings and non-teachings. Here, the doubt arises: Since the right faith of destruction occurs only at the feet of the Kevali and the Shruta Kevali, then only the acquired type of right faith can occur in it, not the innate type. Then why is it that the commentary mentions destruction along with cessation and cessation-destruction when referring to the inner causes? The solution to this doubt is that a being who comes from the second and third hells and becomes a Tirthankara does not need teachings to attain the right faith of destruction, but it is seen that they attain the right faith of destruction without teachings. Therefore, even in the right faith of destruction, there are two types: innate and acquired. This is why the text mentions two types of each of the three types of right faith: innate and acquired.
817 It has been said earlier that believing in life and non-life, etc., is right faith. Now, the following sutra tells us what the principles are:
Life, non-life, inflow, bondage, restraint, outflow, and liberation are the principles. ||4||
1. "The injunction or prohibition applies to the immediately preceding [statement]." Pa. Ma. Bha. p. 335. Pari. She. p. 380 2. Siddha Pratya  Di. 1, Di. 2, A, A.

Page #131:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**§ 18.**  Here, the characteristic of a *jiva* is consciousness, which is differentiated into many forms due to the difference in knowledge, etc.  The characteristic of an *ajiva* is the opposite of that of a *jiva*.  *Asrava* is the form of the door through which good and bad karmas enter.  *Bandha* is the mutual entry of the regions of the soul and karma.  *Samvara* is the characteristic of stopping *asrava*.  *Nirjara* is the characteristic of the destruction of a part of karma.  *Moksha* is the characteristic of the complete separation of karma from the soul.  The detailed explanation of these will be discussed later.  Since the result of everything depends on the soul, the *jiva* is taken first in the sutra.  To show that the *ajiva* is beneficial to the *jiva*, the *ajiva* is mentioned after the *jiva*.  Since *asrava* is the subject of both the *jiva* and the *ajiva*, it is taken after both of them.  *Bandha* is preceded by *asrava*, therefore, it is mentioned after *asrava*.  *Samvara* is the opposite of *bandha* because *bandha* does not exist in the state of *samvara*, therefore, it is mentioned after *bandha* to make this knowledge clear.  *Nirjara* occurs when *samvara* is present, therefore, it is mentioned near *samvara*.  *Moksha* is attained in the end, therefore, it is mentioned at the end.

**§ 19.**  **Doubt:**  Should we include *punya* and *papa* in the sutra, because other teachers have said that there are nine substances?  **Solution:**  We should not include *punya* and *papa* because they are included in *asrava* and *bandha*.  **Doubt:**  If this is the case, then taking *asrava* etc. separately in the sutra is meaningless because they are included in *jiva* and *ajiva*.  **Solution:**  Taking *asrava* etc. separately is not meaningless because the topic here is *moksha*.  Therefore, it is necessary to mention it.  It is preceded by *samsara*, and the main cause of *samsara* is *asrava* and *bandha*, while the main cause of *moksha* is *samvara* and *nirjara*.  Therefore, separate instructions are given to show the main cause, the cause of the cause, and their results.  It is also seen that even if something specific is included in the general, it is taken separately according to the purpose.  For example, "The Kshatriyas have arrived, and Suravarma is also there."  Here, although Suravarma is included in the Kshatriyas, he is taken separately according to the purpose.  Similarly, it should be understood in the present context.

1. *Jiva*.  It is also *asrava*, etc. 2.  *Viprāyoga* is *moksha*.  *Mancha* is *kat* - *moksha*. 1. 5.  *Kundakunda* etc. 16.

3.  Therefore, *samvara* is *asrava*, etc. 1, etc. 2.  *A*.  4.  *Vyam* is *yora* - *moksha*. 17.  *Shasya* is *yathopayogam* *pritha* - *moksha*.

Page #132:
---------------------------
## 12]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[114 § 20
8 20. It has been stated that the word 'tattva' is a noun of quality. How can it be in the same grammatical case as the nouns of substance like 'jiva' etc.?  The answer is that there is no separation between the substance and the quality, and the substance is attributed to the quality. For example, in the statement "Use is the soul", the word 'use' is a noun of quality and the word 'soul' is a noun of substance, and they are in the same grammatical case. Similarly, it should be understood in the present context. 

**Question:** If this is the case, then the gender and number of the qualifier will be the same as that of the qualified? 

**Answer:** According to the rules of grammar, even though there is a relationship between the qualifier and the qualified, the gender and number that a word has acquired due to its meaning are not violated. This rule should also be applied to the first sutra.

§ 21. In order to avoid confusion in the use of the words for the aforementioned things like right faith etc. and the things like 'jiva' etc., the next sutra is stated. 
1. 'The genus which has acquired a gender, having adopted that gender, continues from its origin to its destruction, and does not abandon its gender.' Pa. 11212531 Others also say that the words for qualities do not necessarily follow the gender and number of the substance. Pa. Ma. Bha. 511111591

Page #133:
---------------------------
## Chapter One:  Nomination, Substance, and State

**5.  The placement of name, substance, and state, in terms of their meaning, correct vision, etc., and the placement of the soul, etc.**

**22.  A name is a designation given by one's own will for the purpose of interaction with an object devoid of qualities.  The establishment of a name is the act of placing it, as in "This is wood-work, book-work, painting, or writing."  Substance is that which is obtained by qualities, or that which will be obtained by qualities, or that which will obtain qualities.  State is the substance marked by the present synonym.  For example, the term "soul" is placed in four ways:  name-soul, establishment-soul, substance-soul, and state-soul.  Name-soul is the designation of any being as "soul" without regard to the quality of life.  Establishment-soul is the placement of "soul" or "human soul" in writing, etc.  Substance-soul is of two types:  acquired substance-soul and non-acquired substance-soul.  Acquired substance-soul is the soul that is not useful for the knowledge of the soul or the knowledge of the human soul, even though it has been acquired.  Non-acquired substance-soul is of three types:  knower-body, future, and other than these.  The knower-body is the body of the knower, which is present in all three times.  There is no non-acquired future-soul in relation to the general, because the general life is always present.  However, there is a non-acquired future-soul in relation to the particular.  The soul that is established in another motion, and is facing the attainment of human existence, is called the future-human-soul.  Other than this, there are two types:  karma and non-karma.  State-soul is of two types:  acquired state-soul and non-acquired state-soul.  Acquired state-soul is the soul that is equipped with the knowledge of the soul or the knowledge of the human soul, and is useful for it.  Non-acquired state-soul is the soul that is equipped with the synonym of life or the synonym of human life.  Similarly, the rules of placement of name, etc., should be applied to other substances.  What is the purpose of this?  To negate the irrelevant.**

Page #134:
---------------------------
## 14]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[115 § 23
For the elucidation of the subject matter, the meaning of the word is presented through the method of *nikshepa*. Why is the word 'tat' used? It is used to encompass everything. If the word 'tat' were not used, then only the primary things like *samyagdarshana* would be connected with the *nyasa*, and not the secondary things like *jiva* etc. which are included in the subject matter. But when the word 'tat' is used, then by its power, the inclusion of both primary and secondary things is established.
8 23. How is the knowledge of the subject matter, which is presented through names etc., obtained? This is explained: Knowledge is obtained through *pramana* and *naya*. 11611
24. The essence of *jiva* etc., which are included through the method of *nikshepa* of names etc., is understood through *pramana* and *naya*.
*Jiva* is called so. Similarly, the *nikshepa* method of names etc. should be applied to other substances like *ajiva* etc.
**Doubt:** Why is the *nikshepa* method mentioned?
**Solution:** It is mentioned to refute the non-subject matter and to elucidate the subject matter. The meaning is that the *nikshepa* method explains in detail the meaning of each word in the subject matter.
**Doubt:** Why is the word 'tat' used in the sutra?
**Solution:** The word 'tat' is used in the sutra to encompass everything. If the word 'tat' were not used in the sutra, then only the primary things like *samyagdarshana* would be connected with the *nyasa*. The secondary things like *jiva* etc., which are included in the subject matter of *samyagdarshana* etc., would not be connected with the *nyasa*. But when the word 'tat' is used in the sutra, then by its power, the inclusion of both primary and secondary things is established.
**Special Meaning:** The word *nikshepa* is formed from the root *kṣip* with the prefix *ni*. The meaning of *nikshepa* is 'to place'. The word *nyasa* also has the same meaning. The idea is that each word is used in many different meanings in the world and in the scriptures, depending on the context. The *nikshepa* method is meant to explain where and in what sense each word is used. Although there can be many different types of *nikshepa* according to need, various types are mentioned in the scriptures. But here, four main types are mentioned: name, establishment, substance, and feeling. Their characteristics and examples are explained in the commentary. The idea is that just as the commentary explains the different meanings of the word *jiva* in relation to name *nikshepa*, establishment *nikshepa*, substance *nikshepa*, and feeling *nikshepa*, similarly, each word has a different meaning according to the *nikshepa* method of names etc. This refutes the non-subject matter meaning and establishes the subject matter meaning, which prevents any confusion in practice. This allows both the speaker and the listener to understand each other's intentions clearly. Knowledge of this method is essential for understanding the heart of the text. It is considered very important in the Jain tradition. Keeping this in mind, the nature of *nikshepa* is explained here, along with its different types.
23. This way, the knowledge of the nature of *jiva* etc. and *samyagdarshana* etc., which are obtained through the expansion by names etc., is explained by the next sutra:
Knowledge of substances is obtained through *pramana* and *naya*. ||6||
24. The essence of the substances like *jiva* etc., whose names etc. are explained in detail through the *nikshepa* method, is understood through *pramana* and *naya*.
1. - Without the word 'name', it is not possible.
2. The essence is from *pramana* and *naya*.
And it is understood through *abhigata*, *di*, 1, *di*, 21.

Page #135:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

[15 The characteristics and distinctions of the principles (naya) will be explained. There are two types of principles: self-interest (svartha) and other-interest (parartha). Self-interest principles are like scripture (shruta). Scripture, in turn, can be both self-interest and other-interest. Self-interest is knowledge-based, while other-interest is word-based. These distinctions are the principles (naya).

Here it is said: "Due to the fewer letters in the word 'naya', it should come before 'pramana' in the sutra." This is not a fault. The principle of 'pramana' being superior, it comes first. Superiority is always stronger. Why is 'pramana' superior? Because the formation of the principles (naya) originates from 'pramana'. Thus, it is said: "The determination of meaning through a specific conclusion based on 'pramana' is 'naya'."

'Pramana' encompasses all subjects. It is said: "All subjects are under the purview of 'pramana', while specific subjects are under the purview of 'naya'."

There are two types of 'naya': 'dravya-arthika' and 'paryaya-arthika'. The 'paryaya-arthika' naya is used to understand the essence of 'bhavana'. The other three are understood through the 'dravya-arthika' naya, as it is the general form. 'Dravya' is the object, and its purpose is 'dravya-arthika'. 'Paryaya' is the object, and its purpose is 'paryaya-arthika'. All of this is to be understood through 'pramana'.

Their nature is known through both 'pramana' and the various 'naya'. The characteristics and distinctions of 'pramana' and 'naya' will be explained later. There are two types of 'pramana': self-interest and other-interest. All knowledge except scriptural knowledge is self-interest 'pramana'. However, scriptural knowledge is both self-interest and other-interest. Knowledge-based 'pramana' is called self-interest 'pramana', and word-based 'pramana' is called other-interest 'pramana'. Their distinctions are the 'naya'.

Doubt: The word 'naya' has fewer letters, so shouldn't it be placed first in the sutra?

Solution: This is not a fault, because 'pramana' is superior, hence it is placed first. The rule is that 'superiority is always stronger'.

Doubt: Why is 'pramana' superior?

Solution: Because the formation of the principles (naya) originates from 'pramana', hence 'pramana' is superior. The scriptures say: "To know an object through 'pramana' and then determine its nature through a specific state is 'naya'."

Secondly, 'pramana' encompasses all subjects. The scriptures say: "All subjects are under the purview of 'pramana', while specific subjects are under the purview of 'naya'." Therefore, 'pramana' is superior.

There are two types of 'naya': 'dravya-arthika' and 'paryaya-arthika'. The 'paryaya-arthika' naya is concerned with the essence of 'bhavana', while the other three are understood through the 'dravya-arthika' naya, as it is the general form. 'Dravya' is the object, and its purpose is 'dravya-arthika'. 'Paryaya' is the object, and its purpose is 'paryaya-arthika'. Both 'dravya' and 'paryaya' are the subjects of 'pramana'.

Special Note: This sutra explains how knowledge is understood through the distinctions of 'pramana' and 'naya', and how they are used to understand the nature of the soul (jiva) and other objects. The commentary highlights four main points: (1) Which type of knowledge, out of the five types of knowledge, is included in 'pramana' and 'naya'. (2) The reason for placing the word 'pramana' before 'naya' in the sutra, even though 'naya' has fewer letters. (3) The consideration of which 'naya' is concerned with which of the four essences. (4) The discussion of the subject of 'pramana'.

The first point is clarified by saying that out of the five types of knowledge, only four are considered as knowledge itself, excluding scriptural knowledge. They are also devoid of reasoning, hence they are included in 'pramana' knowledge. However, scriptural knowledge is considered both knowledge and word. It also involves reasoning, hence it has two distinctions: 'pramana' knowledge and 'naya' knowledge.

Here, one might doubt: Since scriptural knowledge is just another type of knowledge like the others, why is it considered both knowledge and word?

The solution is that the scriptural object (dravya) is included in scripture itself. Therefore, 1. We. Shru-mu. 2. 'Javiya Vayanvaha Taviya Chev Hoti Jayvaya.' -Sanmati. 31471 3. Nasya Tatpurva Mu. 4. Yena Paryayat- Mu. 5. -Resham Namasthapanadravyaanam Dravya-Mu. ]

Page #136:
---------------------------
##  **Sarvarthasiddhi**

[117 $ 25$ 25. To demonstrate the alternative means of attaining the knowledge of the Jiva and other entities, which have been attained through the means of Pramana, the author says: _From the standpoint of the establishment of the principle of the means of attaining the knowledge of the Self, the principle of the means of attaining the knowledge of the Self is established._ ॥7॥
826. _Nirdēśa_ is the statement of the nature of something. _Svāmitva_ is the state of being the master. _Sādhana_ is the cause of the origin of something. _Adhikaran_ is the substratum or basis. _Sthiti_ is the duration of time. _Vidhāna_ is the type or difference. In the question, "What is Samyagdarshana?", the statement, "Samyagdarshana is the faith in the Jiva and other entities", is called _Nirdēśa_, or the statement of Samyagdarshana through the use of names, etc., is called _Nirdēśa_. For whom is Samyagdarshana? Generally, it is for the Jiva. Specifically, according to the interpretation of the path of motion, for those in hell, there is a sufficient and a partial remedy for all the earths. For those in the first earth, there is a sufficient and a partial remedy for those who are sufficient and insufficient. For those in the animal realm, there is a sufficient and a partial remedy for those who are sufficient and insufficient.

Page #137:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: On the Cessation of Karma

**There are three types of knowledge: क्षायिक (destructive), क्षायोपशमिक (partially destructive), and सम्यग्दर्शन (right knowledge).**

* **For beings in the realm of hell (नारक), both क्षायिक and क्षायोपशमिक knowledge exist for those who are पर्याप्तक (worthy) and अपर्याप्तक (unworthy).**
* **For beings in the realm of animals (तिर्यंच), क्षायिक knowledge does not exist. Only क्षायोपशमिक and सम्यग्दर्शन exist for पर्याप्तक beings, not for अपर्याप्तक beings.**
* **For beings in the human realm (मनुष्य), both क्षायिक and क्षायोपशमिक knowledge exist for both पर्याप्तक and अपर्याप्तक beings. Only सम्यग्दर्शन exists for पर्याप्तक beings, not for अपर्याप्तक beings.**
* **For beings in the realm of gods (देव), all three types of knowledge exist for both पर्याप्तक and अपर्याप्तक beings.**
* **How can अपर्याप्तक gods have सम्यग्दर्शन?**  It is because they have attained the state of godhood after having experienced the cessation of the four karmic bonds (चारित्रमोहनीय) in their previous human life.
* **For beings in the realms of भवनवासी, व्यन्तर, and ज्योतिषी gods, as well as for the goddesses in these realms and those born in the realms of सौधर्म and ऐशान, क्षायिक knowledge does not exist. Only क्षायोपशमिक and सम्यग्दर्शन exist, and these are only for पर्याप्तक beings.**

**Knowledge is attained through different paths:**

* **Through the path of the senses (इन्द्रियानुवादेन), all three types of knowledge are attained by beings with five senses (पंचेन्द्रिय).**
* **Through the path of the body (कायानुवादेन), all three types of knowledge are attained by beings with three bodies (त्रसकायिक).**
* **Through the path of yoga (योगानुवादेन), all three types of knowledge are attained by beings who practice yoga (त्रयाणां योगानां). For beings who do not practice yoga (अयोगिनां), only क्षायिक knowledge exists.**
* **Through the path of the Vedas (वेदानुवादेन), all three types of knowledge are attained by beings who have knowledge of the Vedas (त्रिवेदानां). For beings who have lost their knowledge of the Vedas (अपगतवेदानां), only क्षायोपशमिक and क्षायिक knowledge exist.**
* **Through the path of the passions (कषायानुवादेन), all three types of knowledge are attained by beings who have four passions (चतुष्कषायाणां). For beings who are free from passions (अकषायाणां), only क्षायोपशमिक and क्षायिक knowledge exist.**

**In the realm of hell (नारक), पर्याप्तक beings have both क्षायोपशमिक and सम्यग्दर्शन. In the first earth (पहली पथिवी), both पर्याप्तक and अपर्याप्तक beings have both क्षायिक and क्षायोपशमिक knowledge.**

**In the realm of animals (तिर्यंच), पर्याप्तक beings have सम्यग्दर्शन. Both पर्याप्तक and अपर्याप्तक beings have both क्षायिक and क्षायोपशमिक knowledge. Animals (तिर्यंचनी) do not have क्षायिक knowledge. Only पर्याप्तक animals have क्षायोपशमिक and सम्यग्दर्शन, not अपर्याप्तक animals.**

**In the human realm (मनुष्य), both पर्याप्तक and अपर्याप्तक beings have both क्षायिक and क्षायोपशमिक knowledge. Only पर्याप्तक humans have सम्यग्दर्शन, not अपर्याप्तक humans. All three types of knowledge exist for पर्याप्तक humans, but not for अपर्याप्तक humans.**

**In the realm of gods (देव), both पर्याप्तक and अपर्याप्तक beings have all three types of knowledge.**

**It is important to note that the human realm (मनुष्य) is the realm where the process of destroying karma (क्षपणाप्रारम्भको) begins. This is why animals (तिर्यक्ष) who are bound by their lifespan (बद्धायुष्को) can only be reborn as humans (पुरुषेष्वेवोत्पद्यते) and not as female animals (तिर्यस्त्रीष). This is because female animals (द्रव्यदेवस्त्रीणां) cannot have क्षायिक knowledge.**

**Therefore, it is understood that अपर्याप्तक animals (तिर्यंचामप्यपर्याप्तकानां) have क्षायोपशमिक knowledge, but not पर्याप्तक animals.**

**The क्षायिक knowledge is attained through the knowledge of the soul (भाववेदेन).**

**The realm of gods (देव) is generally considered to be a realm of liberation (देवा-मु).**

**However, there are specific exceptions, such as the realms of भवनवासी, व्यन्तर, and ज्योतिषी gods (भवन-म).**

Page #138:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**180**
**Sarvartha Siddhi**

[1178 27nuvaaden Aabhinibodhik Shrutaavadhi Manahparyaya Gyaninaam Tritayam Api Asti. Kevalgyaninaam Kshayikam Ev. Samyamanuvaaden Samayik Chhedopasthapanasanyataanaam Tritayam Api Asti. Pariharavishuddhirayataanaam Upshamikam Narit, Itad Dvitayam Asti. Mujhamaasamprayayathaasyatasambataanaam Aupshamikam Kshayikam Cha Asti, Sanyatasanyataanaam Asanvataanaam Cha Tritavam Api Asti. Darshananuvaaden Chakshudarshanaachakshudarshataavadhi Darshininaam Tritayam Api Asti, Kev Pradarshanik Kshayik Mev. Lekhyanuvaaden Shadleshyaanaam Tritayam Api Asti, Aleshyaanaam Kshayikam Ev. Bhavyanavaaden Bhavyanaam Tritayam Api Asti, Nabhavyanaam. Samyaktvanuvaaden Yatra Yat Samyagdarshanam Tatra Tava Jayam! Sanjnanavaaden Sanjinaam Trinayam Api Asti, Naasanjginaam, Tadubhayadhya Pradeshitaanaam Kshayikam Ev. Aahaaranuvaaden Aahaarakanaam Tritayam Api Asti, Anaahaarakanaam Chhadmasthaanaam Tritayam Api Asti, Kevalinaam Samudghatagataanaam Kshayikam Ev.]

**Aupshamik and Kshayik are the two Samyagdarshan.**

**According to the translation of Gyanmarg, Aabhinibodhik Gyani, Dhatgyani, Avadhigyani and Manahparyaya Gyani beings have all three Samyagdarshan, but Kevalgyani beings have only one Kshayik Samyagdarshan.**

**According to the translation of Samyammarg, Samayik and Chhedopasthapanasanyata beings have all three Samyagdarshan, but Pariharavishuddhisanyata beings do not have Aupshamik Samyagdarshan, they have the other two.**

**According to the translation of Darshanmarg, beings with Chakshudarshan, Achakshudarshan and Avadhi Darshan have all three Samyagdarshan, but beings with Kevaldarshan have only one Kshayik Samyagdarshan.**

**According to the translation of Leshyamarg, beings with all six Leshyas have all three Samyagdarshan, but beings without Leshyas have only one Kshayik Samyagdarshan.**

**According to the translation of Bhavyamarg, Bhavy beings have all three Samyagdarshan, but Nabhavy beings do not have any Samyagdarshan.**

**According to the translation of Samyaktvamarg, wherever there is Samyagdarshan, there is knowledge.**

**According to the translation of Sanjnamarg, Sanji beings have all three Samyagdarshan, Asanji beings do not have any Samyagdarshan, and beings without this Sanjna have only one Kshayik Samyagdarshan.**

**According to the translation of Aahaaramarg, Aahaarak beings have all three Samyagdarshan, Anaahaarak Chhadmastha beings also have all three Samyagdarshan, but Samudghatanat Kevali Anaahaarak beings have only one Kshayik Samyagdarshan.**

**Special Note:**

There have been two ancient traditions of discussing the essence of things - one tradition using six authorities like Nirdesha, etc., and another tradition using eight authorities like Sada, etc. Here, the author of Tattvarthasutra, Grdhpiच्छ Acharya, has indicated these two traditions in the 7th and 6th sutras. Here, in the commentary, the nature of Nirdesha, etc., is explained and Samyagdarshan is considered through them. Even in that, to understand the meaning of what is said in relation to ownership, it seems necessary to mention the main context here. Keeping these things in mind helps in determining which Samyagdarshan occurs where and in what state in the four gatis. These things are: 1. The proponent of Kshayik Samyagdarshan is the human being in the Karmabhumika. But such a being, after becoming a Kritakrityavedak Samyagdristi or Kshayik Samyagdristi, can be born in all four gatis after death. 2. In hell, the said being first goes to the first hell. No Samyagdristi is born in the other hells after death. 3. In the Tiryancha and humans, the said being is born in the superior Bhogbhumika, in the Purushavedi Tiryancha and humans. 1. Sanyatasanyavaanaam cha ma. 2. -tayamasti ta.

Page #139:
---------------------------
-1178281 Chapter One
[19 8 28. There are two types of means: internal and external. Internal means is the cessation, destruction, or destruction-cessation of the obscuration of knowledge. External means is as follows: For those in hell, before the fourth hell, i.e., up to the third hell, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some, *dharma-shravana* for some, and *vedana-abhibhava* for some. From the fourth to the seventh hell, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some and *vedana-abhibhava* for some. For those in the animal realm, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some, *dharma-shravana* for some, and *jina-bimba-darshan* for some. The same should be understood for humans. For those in the heaven realm, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some, *dharma-shravana* for some, *jina-mahima-darshan* for some, and *deva-ridhi-darshan* for some. This arrangement should be understood up to the *anata* kalpa. In the *anata*, *pranata*, *aran*, and *achyuta* kalpas, the three means other than *deva-ridhi-darshan* are found for the gods. For those who reside in the nine *praiveyaka* heavens, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some and *dharma-shravana* for some. This is the explanation for those who reside in the *anudi-sha-anuttara-vimana*. 4. No *samyagdarshan* being is born in the female womb of the animal, human, or heaven realms after death. 5. No *samyagdarshan* being is born in the three *bhavana* realms after death. 6. A *samyagdarshan* being with *upashama* is born only in the heaven realm after death. Even then, only a *samyagdarshan* being with *upashama* who is in the *upashama* category can die, not others. 7. A *samyagdarshan* being with *kritya-kritya-vedaka* is a type of *samyagdarshan* being with *kshaya-upashama*. Other than this, *samyagdarshan* beings with *kshaya-upashama* are born only in the heaven and human realms after death, not in the hell or animal realms. If such beings are in the animal or human realms, they are born in the heaven realm. If they are in the hell or heaven realms, they are born in the human realm. 8. A *samyagdarshan* being with *kshayika* or *kritya-kritya-vedaka* is born in the *napumsaka* womb after death. Even then, it is born only in the *nasaka* womb of the first hell. It is not born in the *napumsaka* womb of the human or animal realms. These are the things that should be kept in mind to know which *samyagdarshan* is found in which state of beings in which realm. This is clearly mentioned in the original commentary. One more thing seems necessary to mention, which is that although the realms are divided according to the *bhaava-vedika* category in the *margana* due to the *avantara-bheda-karan-anuyoga*, not the *dravya-vedika* category, therefore, the *bhaava-vedika* females are considered here. However, it is known from other evidence that a *samyagdarshan* being is not born in the *dravya* female womb after death. Thus, we have considered which *samyagdarshan* is found in which state of beings in which realm. It is easy to consider how many *samyagdarshan* beings are found in which *margana* and where they are not found, therefore, we have not explicitly mentioned it here. Only in the *manas-paryaya-jnana*, the existence of a *samyagdarshan* being with *upashama* should be known in relation to a *samyagdarshan* being with the second *upashama*.
28. There are two types of means: internal and external. The cessation, destruction, or destruction-cessation of the obscuration of knowledge is the internal means. The external means is as follows: For those in hell, before the fourth hell, i.e., up to the third hell, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some, *dharma-shravana* for some, and *vedana-abhibhava* for some. From the fourth to the seventh hell, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some and *vedana-abhibhava* for some. For those in the animal realm, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some, *dharma-shravana* for some, and *jina-bimba-darshan* for some. The same should be understood for humans. For those in the heaven realm, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some, *dharma-shravana* for some, *jina-mahima-darshan* for some, and *deva-ridhi-darshan* for some. This arrangement should be understood up to the *anata* kalpa. In the *anata*, *pranata*, *aran*, and *achyuta* kalpas, the three means other than *deva-ridhi-darshan* are found for the gods. For those who reside in the nine *praiveyaka* heavens, *samyagdarshan* arises from *jati-smarana* for some and *dharma-shravana* for some. 1. According to this rule, in the *jiva-kanda*, the verse "हेट्ठिमछप्पुढवीणं" etc., along with the reading "सव्वइत्थीणं", the reading "संढइत्थीणं" should also be understood.

Page #140:
---------------------------
## 20] Sarvarthasiddhi

[1178 29] It is not possible; because the origin of those who have already attained Samyaktvā is not possible there.
8 29. The Adhikaraṇa is of two types - internal and external. The internal Adhikaraṇa is the one whose owner is the Samyakdarshan. For example, the soul, which is the agent of the action, is the internal Adhikaraṇa. The external Adhikaraṇa is the Lokanāḍī. How big is it? It is one rajju wide and fourteen rajju long.
6 30. The lowest and highest duration of the Aupaśamika Samyakdarshan is one Antarmūhūrta. The lowest duration of the Ksāyika Samyakdarshan for a Samsārī Jīva is one Antarmūhūrta, and the highest duration is thirty-three sāgaropam, two purvakoti more, minus eight years and one Antarmūhūrta. The duration for a Mukta Jīva is infinite. The lowest duration of the Ksāyopaśamika Samyakdarshan is one Antarmūhūrta, and the highest duration is sixty-six sāgaropam. Some attain Jāti-smaraṇa (recollection of birth) and some attain Dharma-śravaṇa (hearing of Dharma). The Devas residing in the Anudiś and Anuttaravimāna do not have this possibility, because only Jīvas with Samyakdṛṣṭi are born there.
$29. Adhikaraṇa is of two types—internal and external. Internal Adhikaraṇa—the one whose owner is the Samyakdarshan is its internal Adhikaraṇa. Although the sixth case ending is used for the owner and the seventh case ending is used for the Adhikaraṇa, still, according to the intention, the case ending of the agent is used. Therefore, by using the seventh case ending instead of the sixth case ending, which was used to describe the ownership, the Adhikaraṇa is described. The external Adhikaraṇa is the Lokanāḍī. Doubt—How big is it? Solution—It is one rajju wide and fourteen rajju long.
30. The lowest and highest duration of the Aupaśamika Samyakdarshan is one Antarmūhūrta. The lowest duration of the Ksāyika Samyakdarshan for a Samsārī Jīva is one Antarmūhūrta, and the highest duration is thirty-three sāgaropam, two purvakoti more, minus eight years and one Antarmūhūrta. The duration for a Mukta Jīva is infinite. The lowest duration of the Ksāyopaśamika Samyakdarshan is one Antarmūhūrta, and the highest duration is sixty-six sāgaropam. 1. The Ksāyika Samyakdṛṣṭi attains liberation in the same birth, the third birth, or the fourth birth. The one who attains liberation in the fourth birth, first takes birth in the Maugbhūmi, then in the Deva Paryāya, and finally as a human being, and then attains liberation. The one who attains liberation in the third birth, first takes birth in the Naraka or Deva Paryāya, and finally as a human being, and then attains liberation. Here, the birth of the Ksāyika Samyakdarshan in the third and fourth births has also been included. This highest duration of the Ksāyika Samyakdarshan for a Samsārī Jīva has been described in relation to three births. The first and last two births are for the human Paryāya, and the second birth is for the Deva Paryāya. The highest duration of these three births is thirty-three sāgaropam, two purvakoti more. But the attainment of the Ksāyika Samyakdarshan cannot happen before eight years and one Antarmūhūrta, therefore, subtracting that time from the above-mentioned time, the highest duration of the Ksāyika Samyakdarshan is described as thirty-three sāgaropam, two purvakoti more, minus eight years and one Antarmūhūrta. 2. The highest duration of the Ksāyopaśamika Samyakdarshan in the Khuddābandha is sixty-six sāgaropam, which is described as follows: A Jīva, having attained the Vedaka Samyaktvā from the Upasama Samyaktvā, is born in the Devas with a lifespan of twenty sāgaropam less than the remaining Mujjamāna lifespan. Then, he is born as a human being, and then again as a Deva with a lifespan of twenty-two sāgaropam less than the human lifespan. Then, he goes to the human realm and then is born as a Deva with a lifespan of twenty-four sāgaropam less than the Mujjamāna human lifespan and the lifespan he enjoyed before the destruction of Darshanamoha. From there, he again goes to the human realm, and there, when he is left with one Antarmūhūrta in the time of Vedaka Samyaktvā, he starts the destruction of Darshanamoha and becomes a Kṛtakṛtya Vedaka Samyakdṛṣṭi. When this Jīva is in the last stage of Kṛtakṛtya Vedaka, he attains the highest duration of the Ksāyopaśamika Samyakdarshan, which is sixty-six sāgaropam.

Page #141:
---------------------------
-118833] Chapter One
[217 631. Samyakdarshan is one from the general point of view. It is of two types due to the difference between innate and acquired. It is of three types due to the difference between auspicious, karmic and karmic-auspicious. These are the number of options in terms of words. There are countless and infinite options due to the difference between the believer and the object of belief. In this way, this method of instruction, etc., should be applied in knowledge and conduct, and in the living, non-living, etc., according to the scriptures.
832. Does the knowledge of the living, etc., come from these alone, or is there another means of knowledge, as it is seen? It is said
By existence, number, field, touch, time, interval, state and less-more. ||8||
8 33. 'Sat' is an indication of existence. It is used in praise, etc., but is not taken here. Number is the counting of differences. Field is the residence, the subject of the present time. The same is touch, which is the object of the three times. Time is of two types - primary and practical. Their decision will be made later. Interval is the time of separation. State is the characteristic of auspicious, etc. Less-more is the special understanding in relation to each other. By these, the knowledge of Samyakdarshan, etc., and the living, etc., should be known. But, the acceptance of 'Sat' is proved by instruction itself. From the acceptance of the method, the knowledge of number is obtained. From the acceptance of the subject, the knowledge of field and touch is obtained. From the acceptance of the state, the collection of time is obtained. The state is already collected in the name, etc. Why is their acceptance again? It is true that the acceptance of 'Sat', etc., is proved by instruction, etc., but due to the intention of the disciple, there is a difference in the explanation of the truth. Some are interested in brevity, some are interested in detail. Others
831. Samyakdarshan is one in comparison to the general. It is of two types due to the difference between innate and acquired. It is of three types due to the difference between auspicious, karmic and karmic-auspicious. In terms of words, there are countless types, and in terms of believers, there are countless types, and in terms of objects of belief, there are infinite types. In this way, this method of instruction, etc., should be applied in knowledge and conduct, and in the living, non-living, etc., according to the scriptures.
6 32. Does the knowledge of the living, etc., come from these alone, or are there other means of knowledge? In this way, when asked, there are other means, it is said in the next sutra
By existence, number, field, touch, time, interval, state and less-more, the knowledge of Samyakdarshan, etc., is obtained. ||8||
$ 33. 'Sat' is an indication of existence. It is used in praise, etc., but is not taken here. Number is the counting of differences. Field is the residence, the subject of the present time. The same is touch, which is the object of the three times. Time is of two types - primary and practical. Their decision will be made later. Interval is the time of separation. State is the characteristic of auspicious, etc. Less-more is the special understanding in relation to each other. By these, the knowledge of Samyakdarshan, etc., and the living, etc., should be known. Doubt - the acceptance of 'Sat' is proved by instruction itself. From the acceptance of the method, the knowledge of number is obtained. From the acceptance of the subject, the knowledge of field and touch is obtained. From the acceptance of the state, the collection of time is obtained. The state is already collected in the name, etc. Why is their acceptance again? Solution - It is true that the acceptance of 'Sat', etc., is proved by instruction, etc., but due to the intention of the disciple, there is a difference in the explanation of the truth. Some disciples are interested in brevity. Some disciples 1.-Due to the difference in Rama. And so on. 2.-Country. Praise-Mu. Ta. No. 3. Is acceptance said? True Ta. No. 4. Some are interested in brevity. Others are not-Mu.

Page #142:
---------------------------
## 22] Sarvarthasiddhi

[118834 - Neither too concise nor too elaborate should the exposition be. For the effort of the virtuous is for the benefit of all beings, hence the purpose of this exposition of the different means of attaining knowledge. Otherwise, since "attainment through the means of proof" would suffice, the inclusion of other means would be pointless.

834. Here, with the substance of the living being as the subject, an explanation is given through the doors of the *anuyogins* beginning with *sat*. Living beings are arranged in fourteen *gunasthanas*. These are: *mithyadrishti*, *sasadan samyagdristi*, *samyamithyadrishti*, *asanyata samyagdristi*, *sanyatasanyata*, *pramattasanyata*, *apramattasanyata*, *apuurvakaranasthanavarti* *upshamak* and *kshapik*, *anivrittibaddarasamprayasthanavarti* *upshamak* and *kshapik*, *sukshmasamprayasthanavarti* *upshamak* and *kshapik*, *upshantakashayavitaragchhadmastha*, *kshinakashayavitaragchhadmastha*, *sayogkevali* and *ayogkevali*. To explain these fourteen *jivasamasas*, fourteen *marganasthanas* should be known. These are: *gati*, *indriya*, *kaya*, *yoga*, *veda*, *kashay*, *jnana*, *samyama*, *darshan*, *leshya*, *bhalya*, *samyaktva*, *sanjna* and *aaharaka*.

35. Of these, the *satprarupana* is of two types: general and specific. The general *satprarupana* is to say, "There is *mithyadrishti*, there is *sasadan samyagdristi*, etc." The specific *satprarupana* is through the *marganasthanas*. In the *narakagati*, in all the *prithivis*, there are the first four *gunasthanas*. In the *tiryangagati*, there are those same four *gunasthanas*, but with the addition of the *sanyatasanyata* *gunasthanas*. In the *manushya gati*, there are all fourteen *gunasthanas*. In the *devagati*, there are four *gunasthanas* like the *narakas*. Through the *indriyamargna*, in the *ekendriya* to *chautindriya* beings, there is only one *mithyadrishti* *gunasthanas*. In the *panchendriya* beings, there are all fourteen *gunasthanas*. Through the *kayamargna*, in the *prithivikaya* to *vanaspatikaya* beings, there is only one *mithyadrishti* *gunasthanas*. In the *trasakaya* beings, there are all fourteen *gunasthanas*. Through the *yogamargna*, in the three *yogas*, there are thirteen *gunasthanas*. After that is the *ayogkevali* *gunasthanas*.

Page #143:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

[118840]

**There are 23 Gunasthana (stages of spiritual progress) in the path of liberation.**

**In the path of those who have abandoned the Vedas (Apagata Veda), there are six Gunasthana, starting from Anivrittibadar and ending with Ayogakevali.**

**36. In the path of Kashaya (passions), there are nine Gunasthana, starting from Mithyadrishti (false belief) and ending with Anivrittibadar, for the passions of Krodha (anger), Mana (pride), and Maya (deceit). For the passion of Lobha (greed), there are the same nine Gunasthana, but with the addition of the Gunasthana of Sukshmasamprayaya (subtle attachment). The four Gunasthana of Upashantakshaya (subdued passions), Kshinakshaya (diminished passions), Sayogakevali (liberated with subtle karmas), and Ayogakevali (liberated without subtle karmas) are free from passions.**

**37. In the path of Jnana (knowledge), there are two Gunasthana, Mithyadrishti and Sasadan Samyagdristi (right belief with attachment), in the knowledge of Matyajnana (wrong knowledge), Shrutaajnana (scriptural knowledge), and Vibhangajnana (discriminative knowledge). There are nine Gunasthana, starting from Asamyata Samyagdristi (right belief without control) and ending with Kshinakshaya, in the knowledge of Abhinibodhik Jnana (intuitive knowledge), Shrutaavadhi Jnana (scriptural and clairvoyance knowledge), and Avadhi Jnana (clairvoyance knowledge). There are seven Gunasthana, starting from Pramattasamyata (controlled with distraction) and ending with Kshinakshaya, in the knowledge of Manahparyaya Jnana (knowledge of mind). There are two Gunasthana, Sayoga and Ayoga, in the knowledge of Kevalajnana (omniscience).**

**38. In the path of Samyama (self-control), there are Gunasthana starting from Pramattasamyata and ending with Ayogakevali. The Gunasthana of Samayik Samyata (controlled by Samayik) and Chhedopasthapanashuddhi Samyata (controlled by Chhedopasthapanashuddhi) are from Pramattasamyata to Anivritti. The Gunasthana of Pariharavishuddhi Samyata (controlled by Pariharavishuddhi) are Pramattasamyata and Apramattasamyata (controlled without distraction). The Gunasthana of Sukshmasamprayayashuddhi Samyata (controlled by Sukshmasamprayayashuddhi) is only one, Sukshmasamprayaya. The Gunasthana of Yathakyata Viharashuddhi Samyata (controlled by Yathakyata Viharashuddhi) are from Upashantakshaya to Ayogakevali. The Gunasthana of Samyatasamyata (controlled by Samyatasamyata) is only one, Samyatasamyata. The Gunasthana of Asamyata (uncontrolled) are the first four Gunasthana.**

**39. In the path of Darshan (perception), there are twelve Gunasthana, starting from Mithyadrishti and ending with Kshinakshaya, in the perception of Chakshudarshan (eye perception) and Achakshudarshan (non-eye perception). There are nine Gunasthana, starting from Asamyata Samyagdristi and ending with Kshinakshaya, in the perception of Avadhi Darshan (clairvoyance perception). There are two Gunasthana, Sayogakevali and Ayogakevali, in the perception of Kevaladarshan (omniscient perception).**

**40. In the path of Leshya (color), there are nine Gunasthana, starting from Mithyadrishti and ending with Asamyata Samyagdristi, in the colors of Krishna (black), Neel (blue), and Kapota (grey).**

Page #144:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**24]**

**[188 41]** There are infinite number of souls in Mithyadrishti. There are countless souls in Saasadan Samyagdristi, Samyamithyadristi, Asanyata Samyagdristi and  Sanyata Asanyata. There are countless souls in each of these states. The number of souls in Pramatta Sanyata is equal to the number of Koti (a very large number) of Pruthaktva (individuality). There are seven Gunasthanas from Mithyadristi to Apramatta Sanyata in Peet and Padmaleśya. There are thirteen Gunasthanas from Mithyadristi to Sayogakevali in Shuklaleśya. But Ayogakevali souls are devoid of Leśya.

**[8 41]** There are fourteen Gunasthanas in Bhavyas according to the Bhavyanuvada. But Abhavyas are found only in the first Gunasthan.

**[8 42]** There are eleven Gunasthanas from Asanyata Samyagdristi to Ayogakevali in Kshayik Samyaktva according to the Samyaktvanuvada. There are four Gunasthanas from Asanyata Samyagdristi to Apramatta Sanyata in Kshayopashamiksamyaktva. There are eight Gunasthanas from Asanyata Samyagdristi to Upashantakshaya in Aupashamiksamyaktva. Saasadan Samyagdristi, Samyamithyadristi and Mithyadristi are found in their respective Gunasthanas.

**[8 43]** There are twelve Gunasthanas from Mithyadristi to Kshina Kshaya in Sanjnis according to the Sanjnanuvada. There is only one Gunasthan, Mithyadristi, in Asanjnis. The souls who are devoid of the term Sanjni and Asanjni are Sayogakevali and Ayogakevali, respectively.

**[8 44]** There are thirteen Gunasthanas from Mithyadristi to Sayogakevali in Aharakas according to the Aharanuvada. There are three Gunasthanas, Mithyadristi, Saasadan Samyagdristi and Asanyata Samyagdristi, in Anaharakas who have attained the state of Vigrahagatya. Sayogakevali and Ayogakevali souls who are in the state of Samudghatagata are also Anaharakas. Siddhas, the Paramesthis, are beyond Gunasthanas. Thus, the explanation of Satpraropaṇa is complete.

**[8 45]** Now, we will explain the Sankhyapraropana. It is of two types: general and specific. Generally, there are infinite number of souls in Mithyadristi. There are countless souls in Saasadan Samyagdristi, Samyamithyadristi, Asanyata Samyagdristi and Sanyata Asanyata. The number of souls in Pramatta Sanyata is equal to the number of Koti (a very large number) of Pruthaktva (individuality). Pruthaktva is a term used in the Agamas.

Page #145:
---------------------------
- [118846] - Chapter One
[25] The number of beings in the three realms is from three to nine. The number of beings who are not heedless and restrained is countable. The number of beings in the four stages of liberation is one, two, or three at the beginning, and forty-four at the peak. The number of beings who are accumulated by their own time is countable. The number of beings in the four stages of destruction and the non-liberated is one, two, or three at the beginning, and one hundred and eight at the peak. The number of beings who are accumulated by their own time is countable. The number of beings in the liberated is one, two, or three at the beginning, and one hundred and eight at the peak. The number of beings who are accumulated by their own time is one hundred thousand.
846. In particular, according to the translation of the path of motion, in the first earth of the hell realm, the number of beings who are false-believers is countless, and the number of these realms is countless. In the second and subsequent earths up to the seventh earth, the number of beings who are false-believers is countless, and the number of these realms is countless. This countless number is countless kotis of yojanas. In all the earths, the number of beings who are right-believers, mixed-believers, and unrestrained right-believers is countless. In the animal realm, the number of beings who are false-believers is infinite. The number of beings in each stage of liberation from right-believers to restrained is countless. In the human realm, the number of beings who are false-believers is countless, and the number of these realms is countless. This countless number is countless kotis of yojanas. The number of beings in each stage of liberation from right-believers to restrained is countable. The number of beings who are heedless and restrained is the same as that which has been stated above. In the god realm, the number of beings who are false-believers is countless. 1. The false-believers in the animal realm. 2. A realm is a row of sky regions that is seven rajjus long and one pradesa wide. The number of beings who are false-believers in the first hell is equal to the number of pradesas in the countless realms of the first hell. 3. A realm is a square of realms. 4. The number of beings in each of the second and subsequent hells is equal to the number of yojanas in the countless realms of the first hell. This number decreases progressively. 5. This number includes the number of beings who are restrained. 6. The number of beings in each stage of liberation from right-believers to restrained is explained in detail in the commentary on the Tattvartha Sutra by Acharya Umasvati. 7. The number of beings who are false-believers in the god realm should be understood to be the same as the number of beings who are false-believers in the first hell. The same should be understood in the same way for the rest.

Page #146:
---------------------------
## 26] Sarvarthasiddhi

[118847 - Kotikotiyah. Sasadan Samyagdristi, etc., are countable from Samyata to Samyatanta. The number of Pramatta, etc., is generally stated. In Devagati, there are countless categories of Devas with Mithyadristi, which are measured by Pratara-Asankhyeya-Bhaga. Sasadan Samyagdristi, Samyamithyadristi, and Samyata Samyagdristi are measured by Palyopama-Asankhyeya-Bhaga.
847. According to Indriyanuvaada, there are countless categories of Ekendriya Mithyadristi. Dwi-Indriya, Tri-Indriya, and Chatur-Indriya are countless categories, measured by Pratara-Asankhyeya-Bhaga. Panchendriya Mithyadristi are countless categories, measured by Pratara-Asankhyeya-Bhaga. The number of Sasadan Samyagdristi, etc., up to Ayogakevali, is generally stated.
848. According to Kayanuvaada, there are countless Lokas of Prithvi-Kayika, Jal-Kayika, Agni-Kayika, and Vayu-Kayika. Vanaspati-Kayika are countless. The number of Trasa-Kayika is equal to that of Panchendriya.
849. According to Vaadanuvaada, there are countless categories of Manoyogi and Vayoyogi Mithyadristi, measured by Pratara-Asankhyeya-Bhaga. Kayayogi Mithyadristi are countless. The number of Sasadan Maya, etc., up to Samyata-Samyatanta, for all three Yogis, is measured by Palyopama-Asankhyeya-Bhaga. The number of Pramatta-Samyata, etc., up to Sayogakevali, is countable. The number of Ayogakevali is generally stated.
850. According to Vedanuvaada, there are countless categories of Stri-Veda and Purusha-Veda Mithyadristi, measured by Pratara-Asankhyeya-Bhaga. Napumsaka-Veda Mithyadristi are countless. The number of Sasadan Samyagdristi, etc., up to Samyata-Samyatanta, for Stri-Veda and Napumsaka-Veda, is generally stated. The number of Pramatta-Samyata, etc., up to Anivriti-Baadara, is countable. These are the countless categories of Jaga-Shreni, which are measured by countless parts of Jaga-Pratara. Sasadan Samyagdristi, Samyagmithyadristi, and Asamyata Samyagdristi, each with their respective Gunasthanas, are measured by countless parts of Palyopama.
847. According to Indriyanuvaada, Ekendriya Mithyadristi Jivas are countless. Dwi-Indriya, Tri-Indriya, and Chatur-Indriya Jivas are countless categories, measured by countless parts of Jaga-Shreni. Panchendriya Mithyadristi Jivas are countless categories, measured by countless parts of Jaga-Shreni. The number of Sasadan Samyagdristi, etc., up to Ayogakevali Gunasthanas, for Panchendriya, is the same as generally stated.
848. According to Kayanuvaada, the number of Prithvi-Kayika, Jal-Kayika, Agni-Kayika, and Vayu-Kayika Lokas is countless. Vanaspati-Kayika Jivas are countless. The number of Trasa-Kayika Jivas is equal to that of Panchendriya.
849. According to Vaadanuvaada, there are countless categories of Manoyogi and Vayoyogi Mithyadristi Jivas, measured by countless parts of Jaga-Shreni. Kayayogi Mithyadristi Jivas are countless. The number of Sasadan Samyagdristi, etc., up to Samyata-Samyatanta, for all three Yogis, is measured by countless parts of Palyopama. The number of Pramatta-Samyata, etc., up to Sayogakevali Gunasthanas, for all three Yogis, is countable. The number of Ayogakevali is the same as generally stated.
850. According to Vedanuvaada, there are countless categories of Stri-Veda and Purusha-Veda Mithyadristi Jivas, measured by countless parts of Jaga-Shreni. Napumsaka-Veda Mithyadristi Jivas are countless. The number of Sasadan Samyagdristi, etc., up to Samyata-Samyatanta, for Stri-Veda 
1 Yogishu Mithya-Mu. - Yogeshhu Mithya-Di. 2. 2. - Nanta:। Triyoginaam Saasa-Mu.। 3. Although the number of Trasa-Kayika is greater than that of Panchendriya, here, the number of Trasa-Kayika is stated to be equal to that of Panchendriya, in comparison to the general countless number.

Page #147:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**118852**

**27.** The number of beings with *Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi* and above, up to *Anivṛttibādar*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Apagataveda*, from *Anivṛttibādar* to *Ayogakevali*, is the same as the general number.

**51.** According to the *Kaṣāya* classification, the number of beings with *Mithyādṛṣṭi* and above, up to *Samyatāsamyat*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Pramattasamyata* and above, up to *Anivṛttibādar*, is countable. The same order applies to beings with *Lobha* as their dominant *Kaṣāya*. However, there is a special case: the number of beings with *Sūkṣmasāmprāyika* *Samyat* is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Upaśānta* *Kaṣāya* and above, up to *Ayogakevali*, is the same as the general number.

**852.** According to the *Jñāna* classification, the number of beings with *Mātyajñānī* and *Śrutājñānī* is the same as the general number for those with *Mithyādṛṣṭi* and *Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi*. The number of beings with *Vibhaṅgajñānī* and *Mithyādṛṣṭi* is uncountable, as many as the *Jagashreṇī* (world-series), which are as many as the uncountable parts of *Jagapratara* (world-extremes). The number of beings with *Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi* and *Vibhaṅgajñānī* is as many as the uncountable parts of *Palyopam* (a measure of vastness). The number of beings with *Matijñānī* and *Śrutājñānī*, from *Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi* to *Kṣīṇakaṣāya*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Avadhijñānī*, from *Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi* to *Samyatāsamyat*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Avadhijñānī*, from *Pramattasamyata* to *Kṣīṇakaṣāya*, is countable. The number of beings with *Manahparyayajñānī*, from *Pramattasamyata* to *Kṣīṇakaṣāya*, is countable. The number of beings with *Kevalajñānī* is the same as the general number, both with *Sayoga* and *Ayoga*. The number of beings with *Apagataveda* is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Strīveda* and *Napumsaka* *veda*, from *Pramattasamyata* to *Anivṛttibādar*, is countable. The number of beings with *Purushaveda*, from *Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi* to *Anivṛttibādar*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Apagataveda*, from *Anivṛttibādar* to *Ayogakevali*, is the same as the general number.

**51.** According to the *Kaṣāya* classification, the number of beings with *Mithyādṛṣṭi* and above, up to *Samyatāsamyat*, is the same as the general number for each *Guṇasthāna* (stage of spiritual development). The number of beings with *Pramattasamyata* and above, up to *Anivṛttibādar*, is countable for each *Kaṣāya*. The same order applies to beings with *Lobha* as their dominant *Kaṣāya*. However, there is a special case: the number of beings with *Sūkṣmasāmprāyika* *Samyat* is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Upaśānta* *Kaṣāya* and above, up to *Ayogakevali*, is the same as the general number.

**852.** According to the *Jñāna* classification, the number of beings with *Mātyajñānī* and *Śrutājñānī* is the same as the general number for those with *Mithyādṛṣṭi* and *Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi*. The number of beings with *Vibhaṅgajñānī* and *Mithyādṛṣṭi* is uncountable, as many as the *Jagashreṇī* (world-series), which are as many as the uncountable parts of *Jagapratara* (world-extremes). The number of beings with *Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi* and *Vibhaṅgajñānī* is as many as the uncountable parts of *Palyopam* (a measure of vastness). The number of beings with *Matijñānī* and *Śrutājñānī*, from *Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi* to *Kṣīṇakaṣāya*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Avadhijñānī*, from *Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi* to *Samyatāsamyat*, is the same as the general number. The number of beings with *Avadhijñānī*, from *Pramattasamyata* to *Kṣīṇakaṣāya*, is countable for each *Guṇasthāna*. The number of beings with *Manahparyayajñānī*, from *Pramattasamyata* to *Kṣīṇakaṣāya*, is countable for each *Guṇasthāna*.

Page #148:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**28]**

**[118853853.  **In the context of *Samyama* (self-restraint), the number of *Samayika* (periodic fast) *Samyata* (restrained) and *Chhedopasthapana* (periodic fast with offering) *Samyata* beings, from *Pramatta* (distracted) to *Anivritibadara* (those who have not overcome the *badara* - the last stage of *karma* - completely), is *Samaanyokta* (generalized). The number of *Parihara* (purification) *Samyata* beings, from *Pramatta* to *Apramatta* (undistracted), is *Sankhyeya* (countable). The number of *Sukshmasamprayaya* (subtle *karma* annihilation) *Samyata* beings, like *Yathakyatavihara* (living according to the right conduct) *Samyata* beings, *Samyatasamyata* (restrained and restrained) beings, and *Asamyata* (unrestrained) beings, is *Samaanyokta*.

**854.** In the context of *Darsana* (perception), the number of *Chakshudanina* (those who have eye-perception) with *Mithyadrishti* (false belief) is *Asankhyeya* (innumerable) *Jagashrena* (world-series), which are *Prataraasankhyeya* (innumerable times innumerable) parts of a *Jag* (world). The number of *Achakshudarshana* (those who do not have eye-perception) with *Mithyadrishti* is *Anantananta* (infinitely infinite). The number of both types of beings, from *Sasadan* (with *sadana* - the first stage of *karma*) *Samyagdristi* (right belief) to *Kshina-kshaya* (those who have exhausted their *karma*) is *Samaanyokta*. The number of *Avadhi* (clairvoyance) *Darshana* beings is the same as the number of *Avadhigyani* (those who have clairvoyance). The number of *Kevaladarshana* (omniscience) beings is the same as the number of *Kevalgyani* (those who have omniscience).

**855.** In the context of *Leshya* (color of the soul), the number of beings with *Krishna* (black), *Nila* (blue), and *Kapota* (grey) *Leshya*, from *Mithyadrishti* to *Asamyatasamyagdristi* (unrestrained right belief), is *Samaanyokta*. The number of beings with *Teja* (radiant), *Padma* (lotus), and *Leshya*, from *Mithyadrishti* to *Samyatasamyata* (restrained and restrained), is the same as the number of *Striveda* (women who have knowledge of the scriptures). The number of *Pramatta* (distracted) and *Apramatta* (undistracted) *Samyata* beings with *Teja* and *Padma* *Leshya* is *Sankhyeya*. The number of beings with *Shukla* (white) *Leshya*, from *Mithyadrishti* to *Samyatasamyata*, is *Palyopamasankhyeya* (innumerable times innumerable) parts of a *Palyopama* (a very large number). The number of *Pramatta* and *Apramatta* *Samyata* beings with *Shukla* *Leshya* is *Sankhyeya*. The number of beings from *Apuurvakarana* (those who have not performed the first *karma*) to *Sayogakevali* (those who have attained liberation with *karma*), and those without *Leshya*, is *Samaanyokta*.

**856.** In the context of *Bhavya* (those who will attain liberation), the number of beings from *Mithyadrishti* to *Ayogakevali* (those who have attained liberation without *karma*), is *Samaanyokta*. The number of *Abhavya* (those who will not attain liberation) is *Ananta* (infinite). The number of beings with *Manahparyaya* (knowledge of the minds of others) in *Ganasthana* (the realm of the gods) is *Sankhyeya*. The number of *Sayogi* (those who have *karma*) and *Ayogi* (those who do not have *karma*) *Kevalgyani* is *Samaanyokta*.

**853.** In the context of *Samyama* (self-restraint), the number of beings from *Pramattasamyata* (distracted and restrained) to *Anivritibadara* (those who have not overcome the *badara* - the last stage of *karma* - completely), including *Samayikasamyata* (periodic fast *Samyata*) and *Chhedopasthapanasamyata* (periodic fast with offering *Samyata*), is *Samaanyokta*. The number of *Pramatta* (distracted) and *Apramatta* (undistracted) beings in *Gunasthan* (the realm of the qualities) with *Pariharavishuddhisamyata* (purification *Samyata*) is *Sankhyeya*. The number of *Sukshmasamprayayasamyata* (subtle *karma* annihilation *Samyata*), *Yathakyataviharasamyata* (living according to the right conduct *Samyata*), *Samyatasamyata* (restrained and restrained), and *Asamyata* (unrestrained) beings is *Samaanyokta*.

**854.** In the context of *Darsana* (perception), the number of *Chakshudarshana* (those who have eye-perception) with *Mithyadrishti* (false belief) is *Asankhyeya* *Jagashrena* (innumerable world-series), which are *Prataraasankhyeya* (innumerable times innumerable) parts of a *Jag* (world). The number of *Achakshudarshana* (those who do not have eye-perception) with *Mithyadrishti* is *Anantananta* (infinitely infinite). The number of both types of beings, from *Sasadan* (with *sadana* - the first stage of *karma*) *Samyagdristi* (right belief) to *Kshina-kshaya* (those who have exhausted their *karma*) is *Samaanyokta*. The number of *Avadhi* (clairvoyance) *Darshana*

Page #149:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**857.** In the context of *Samyaktvamargna*, the number of *Asanyata Samyagdristi* among *Kshayika Samyagdristi* is countless. The number of *Sanyata* to *Upashanta* is countable. The four *Kshapaka*, *Sayogakevali* and *Ayogakevali* are all of a general number. The number of *Asanyata Samyagdristi* to *Aparamatta Sanyata* among *Kshayopa Shamika Samyagdristi* is of a general number. The number of *Asanyata Samyagdristi* and *Sanyata Sanyata* among *Aupa Shamika Samyagdristi* is countless. The number of *Pramatta* and *Aparamatta Sanyata* is countable. The four *Aupa Shamika* are of a general number. The number of *Sasa Dana Samyagdristi*, *Samyagmithyadristi* and *Mithyadristi* is of a general number.

**858.** In the context of *Sanjna Margna*, the number of *Mithyadristi* to *Kshina Kshaya* among *Sanjnis* is the same as the number of *Chakshudarshini* beings. The number of *Asanjnini Mithyadristi* is infinite. The number of *Sanjnis* and *Asanjnini* without *Sanjna* is of a general number.

**859.** In the context of *Ahar Margna*, the number of *Mithyadristi* to *Sayogakevali* among *Aharaka* is of a general number. The number of *Mithyadristi*, *Sasa Dana Samyagdristi* and *Asanyata Samyagdristi* among *Anaharaka* is of a general number. The number of *Sayogakevali* is countable and the number of *Ayogakevali* is of a general number. Thus, the number is determined.

**860.** Now, we speak of the *Kshetra*. It is of two types, general and specific. In general, the *Kshetra* of *Mithyadristi* is the entire *Loka*. The *Kshetra* of *Sasa Dana Samyagdristi* to *Ayogakevali* is a countless part of the *Loka*. The *Kshetra* of *Sayogakevali* is a countless part of the *Loka*, a countless number of parts of the *Loka*, or the entire *Loka*.

**1.** - *Bhaga*: Countless or a part of the entire *Loka*.

**2.** The number of *Mithyadristi Sanjnis* is countless *Jagashreni* (world series). The number of *Sasa Dana* etc. *Sanjnis* is the same as the number of those who have attained the corresponding *Gunasthan*.

**3.** Countable.

**4.** The number of *Mithyadristi Aharaka* is infinite. The number of *Aharaka* from *Sasa Dana* to *Sanyata Sanyata* is a countless part of *Paly*. The rest are countable.

**5.** The number of *Mithyadristi Anaharaka* is infinite. Similarly, the number of *Sasa Dana Samyagdristi* and *Asanyata Samyagdristi Anaharaka* is a countless part of *Paly*.

**6.** Countable.

Page #150:
---------------------------
##  **Translation of the Jain Text:**

**301 Sarvarthasiddhi**

**[118861861.  **Specifically, in terms of the path of motion (GatyAnuvaad), the realm of the hell-bound beings (Naraka) is an immeasurable portion of the universe (Lok) across all the Earths (Prithvi) and in all four stages of existence (Gunasthan). In the realm of the animal beings (Tiryanch), the realm of those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of restrained and unrestrained (Sanyata-Sanyata) is generally the entire universe. In the realm of human beings (Manushya), the realm of those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of non-liberated (Ayogkevali) is an immeasurable portion of the universe. The realm of those who have attained the state of liberated (Sayogkevali) is generally the entire universe. In the realm of the gods (Deva), the realm of all the gods in all four stages of existence (Gunasthan) is an immeasurable portion of the universe.

**62.  **In terms of the path of senses (IndriyaAnuvaad), the realm of those with one sense (Ekeindriya) is the entire universe. The realm of those with impaired senses (Vikaleindriya) is an immeasurable portion of the universe. The realm of those with five senses (Panchendriya) is similar to that of humans.

**863.  **In terms of the path of body (KayaAnuvaad), the realm of all beings from those with an earth body (PrithviKaya) to those with a plant body (VanaspatiKaya) is the entire universe. The realm of those with a body (Sakayika) is similar to that of those with five senses.

**864.  **In terms of the path of yoga (YogaAnuvaad), the realm of those with speech yoga (VangYoga) and mind yoga (ManasYoga) from those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of liberated (Sayogkevali) is an immeasurable portion of the universe. The realm of those with body yoga (KayaYoga) from those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of liberated (Sayogkevali) and those who have attained the state of non-liberated (Ayogkevali) is generally the entire universe.

**865.  **In terms of the path of knowledge (VedaAnuvaad), the realm of those with female knowledge (Striveda) and male knowledge (Purushveda) from those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of non-restraint (AnivritiBada) is an immeasurable portion of the universe. The realm of those with neuter knowledge (Napumsakveda) from those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of non-restraint (AnivritiBada) and those who have lost their knowledge (Apagatveda) is generally the entire universe.

**866.  **In terms of the path of passions (KashayaAnuvaad), the realm of those with anger (Krodha), pride (Mana), deceit (Maya), and greed (Lobha) passions, those with subtle greed (ShlobhaKashaya) passions, and those with subtle passions (SookshmaSamparaya) from those with false beliefs (Mithyadrishti) to those who have attained the state of non-restraint (AnivritiBada) and those who are free from passions (Akashaya) is generally the entire universe.

**1.  **StriPumsveda-Ta.
**2.  **MayaLoma-Ma., Di. 2
**2.  **MayaNaam Loma-Di. 11.

Page #151:
---------------------------
–118 § 71]
Chapter 1
[31.
867. The common field of the ignorant and the learned, who have false vision and the vision of the path of liberation, is described in the context of knowledge. The field of those who have the knowledge of differentiation, who have false vision and the vision of the path of liberation, is an innumerable part of the world. The common field of those who have the knowledge of the subtle, who have the knowledge of destruction, who have the vision of the path of liberation, who are unrestrained, who have exhausted their passions, who have the knowledge of mental perception, who are heedless, who have exhausted their passions, and who have the knowledge of the absolute, who have the knowledge of the combined and the uncombined, is described.
868. The common field of those who are restrained, who are unrestrained, and who are in the four stages of restraint, is described in the context of restraint. The four stages of restraint are: those who practice the vow of non-violence, those who practice the vow of truthfulness, those who practice the vow of non-stealing, and those who practice the vow of non-attachment. The four stages of unrestraint are: those who are heedless, those who are heedless and restrained, those who are restrained and unrestrained, and those who are unrestrained.
869. The common field of those who have the vision of the eye, who have false vision, and who have exhausted their passions, is an innumerable part of the world, as described in the context of vision. The common field of those who do not have the vision of the eye, who have false vision, and who have exhausted their passions, is described. The field of those who have the vision of the subtle is like that of those who have the knowledge of the subtle. The field of those who have the absolute vision is like that of those who have the absolute knowledge.
870. The common field of those who have the black, blue, and dove-colored hues, who have false vision, and who are unrestrained, is described in the context of hues. The field of those who have the yellow and lotus-colored hues, who have false vision, and who are heedless, is an innumerable part of the world. The field of those who have the white hue, who have false vision, and who have exhausted their passions, is an innumerable part of the world. The common field of those who have the white hue, who are absolute knowers, and who are without hues, is described.
871. The common field of the fourteen stages of the blessed is described in the context of the blessed. The field of the unblessed is the entire world.
867. The common field of the ignorant and the learned, who have false vision and the vision of the path of liberation, is described in the context of knowledge. The field of those who have the knowledge of differentiation, who have false vision and the vision of the path of liberation, is an innumerable part of the world. The common field of those who have the knowledge of the subtle, who have the knowledge of destruction, who have the vision of the path of liberation, who are unrestrained, who have exhausted their passions, who have the knowledge of mental perception, who are heedless, who have exhausted their passions, and who have the knowledge of the absolute, who have the knowledge of the combined and the uncombined, is described.
868. The common field of those who are restrained, who are unrestrained, and who are in the four stages of restraint, is described in the context of restraint. The four stages of restraint are: those who practice the vow of non-violence, those who practice the vow of truthfulness, those who practice the vow of non-stealing, and those who practice the vow of non-attachment. The four stages of unrestraint are: those who are heedless, those who are heedless and restrained, those who are restrained and unrestrained, and those who are unrestrained.
869. The common field of those who have the vision of the eye, who have false vision, and who have exhausted their passions, is an innumerable part of the world, as described in the context of vision. The common field of those who do not have the vision of the eye, who have false vision, and who have exhausted their passions, is described. The field of those who have the vision of the subtle is like that of those who have the knowledge of the subtle. The field of those who have the absolute vision is like that of those who have the absolute knowledge.
870. The common field of those who have the black, blue, and dove-colored hues, who have false vision, and who are unrestrained, is described in the context of hues. The field of those who have the yellow and lotus-colored hues, who have false vision, and who are heedless, is an innumerable part of the world. The field of those who have the white hue, who have false vision, and who have exhausted their passions, is an innumerable part of the world. The common field of those who have the white hue, who are absolute knowers, and who are without hues, is described.
871. The common field of the fourteen stages of the blessed is described in the context of the blessed. The field of the unblessed is the entire world.

Page #152:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**32] Sarvarthasiddhi**

[118872672.  The common field of the *kshayika samyagdrsti* from *asamyata samyagdrsti* to *ayogakevali*, the *kshayopashamika samyagdrsti* from *asamyata samyagdrsti* to *apramatta samyata*, the *aupashamika samyagdrsti* from *asamyata samyagdrsti* to *upashanta kshaya ganasthan*, the *sasadan samyagdrsti*, *samyagmithyadrsti* and *mithyadrsti* is the same.
$73. The common field of the *sajina* is like the vision of the *sajina* eyes. The common field of the *asajina* is all the worlds. The common field of those who are neither *sajina* nor *asajina* is the same.
74. The common field of the *aaharaka* from *mithyadrsti* to *kshinakshaya* is the same. The *sayogakevali* are an innumerable part of the world. The common field of the *anaaharaka* is *mithyadrsti*, *sasadan samyagdrsti*, *asamyata samyagdrsti* and *ayogakevali*. The *sayogakevali* are an innumerable part of the world or all the worlds. The field has been determined.
872. The common field of the *kshayika samyagdrsti* from *asamyata samyagdrsti* to *ayogakevali* is the same. The common field of the *kshayopashamika samyagdrsti* from *asamyata samyagdrsti* to *apramatta samyata* is the same. The common field of the *aupashamika samyagdrsti* from *asamyata samyagdrsti* to *upashanta kshaya ganasthan* is the same. The common field of the *sasadan samyagdrsti*, *samyagmithyadrsti* and *mithyadrsti* is the same.
873. The common field of the *sanjna* is like the vision of the *sanjna* eyes. The common field of the *asanjna* is all the worlds. The common field of those who are neither *sanjna* nor *asanjna* is the same.
. The common field of the *aaharaka* from *mithyadrsti* to *kshinakshaya* is the same. The *sayogakevali* are an innumerable part of the world. The common field of the *anaaharaka* is *mithyadrsti*, *sasadan samyagdrsti*, *asamyata samyagdrsti* and *ayogakevali*. The *sayogakevali* are an innumerable part of the world or all the worlds.
Special Note - In the description of the field, only the present dwelling place is considered. *Mithyadrsti* beings are found in all the worlds, therefore their field is considered to be all the worlds. Other *ganasthan* beings are found only in an innumerable part of the world, therefore their field is considered to be an innumerable part of the world. Only *sayogikevali* are an exception. Although the field of the *sayogikevali* in their own place is also an innumerable part of the world, the *sayogikevali* who perform *samudghata* have a field of three types. During *samudghata* in the form of *danda* and *kapaata*, their field is an innumerable part of the world. During *samudghata* in the form of *pratar*, their field is an innumerable part of the world. During *samudghata* in the form of *lokapuraka*, their field is all the worlds. Therefore, their field is described in three ways. When considering the field of other *margana* like *gati*, etc., this perspective should be kept in mind. Generally, the field can be understood from these points: 1. Only the *ekendriya* among the *mithyadrsti* have a field of all the worlds. The rest do not. There are some sub-categories of them who do not have a field of all the worlds, but they are not intended here. According to this, all the *margana* that are possible for the *ekendriya* should be considered to have a field of all the worlds. For example, in *gati margana*, *tiryanch gati margana*, in *indriya margana*, *ekendriya margana*, in *kaya-pagana*, *prithvi* etc. five *sthavara kaya margana*, in *yoga* 1. - *asyasankeyamaga* mu., di. 1, di. 21

Page #153:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: 8.75. Touch is Explained

Touch is of two types: general and specific.

**General Touch:**

* **Mithyadrishtis (wrong-believers):** They touch the entire realm.
* **Sasadan Samyagdristis (right-believers with attachment):** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm, as well as 8 or 12 out of 14 parts of the Trasanali (the realm of the three worlds).
* **Samyagmithyadrishtis (mixed-believers) and Asanyata Samyagdristis (right-believers without restraint):** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm, as well as 8 out of 14 parts of the Trasanali.
* **Sanjata Samyagdristis (right-believers with restraint):** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm, as well as 6 out of 14 parts of the Trasanali.

**Specific Touch:**

* **Kayayoga (body-yoga):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Vedamargana (path of knowledge):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Kasaya Margana (path of passions):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Jnana Margana (path of knowledge):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Samyama Margana (path of restraint):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Darshan Margana (path of perception):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Leshya Margana (path of subtle bodies):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Bhavya Margana (path of becoming):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Samyaktva Margana (path of right-belief):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Sanjna Margana (path of consciousness):** This becomes the realm of all beings.
* **Ahar Margana (path of food):** This becomes the realm of all beings.

**Specific Touch for Different Beings:**

1. **Sasadan Samyagdristis to Kshina Kasaya Gunasthanas (right-believers with attachment to those with subtle passions):** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm.
2. **Two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and five-sense beings without consciousness:** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm.
3. **Conscious beings except for those who are in the state of Samudghata (liberation) with Sayogika Kevalis (liberated beings with karmic attachments):** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm.

**Specific Touch during Samudghata:**

* **During the Samudghata of Sayogika Kevalis:** All beings touch the realm.
* **During the Lokapurana Samudghata (liberation of the entire realm):** The following Marganas are found: Manushya Gati (human path), Panchendriya Jati (five-sense beings), Trasakaya (suffering body), Kayayoga (body-yoga), Apangataved (knowledge without defects), Akasaya (without passions), Kevaljnana (omniscience), Yathakyata Samyama (perfect restraint), Keval Darshan (omniscient perception), Shukla Leshya (white subtle body), Bhavya (becoming), Kshayika Samyaktva (right-belief that is fading), Na Sanjni Na Asanjni (neither conscious nor unconscious), and Anahar (without food).
* **During the Pratar Samudghata (liberation of the remaining realm):** An immeasurable portion of the realm is touched.

**Specific Touch for Different Marganas:**

* **Kayayoga, Bhavya, and Anahar:** These three Marganas touch the realm during Lokapurana and Pratar Samudghata.
* **All other Marganas:** They touch an immeasurable portion of the realm except during the above-mentioned states.

**Conclusion:**

This is how the touch of the realm is determined.

Page #154:
---------------------------
## 34]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[118 § 76
**Deshonah:** The countless part of the world, or six or fourteen parts less, is touched by the restrained and unrestrained. The touch of the heedless, restrained, etc., up to the Aayog Kevali, is like that of a field.
§ 76 **Visheshena Gatyavaadena:** In particular, according to the theory of motion, in the first earth of the hell-realm, the hell-beings with four Gunasthana, have touched a countless part of the world. In the second and subsequent earths up to the seventh, the hell-beings with Mithyadrishti and Sasadan Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world, and one, two, three, four, and five parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The hell-beings with Samyag Mithyadrishti and Asanyata Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world. In the seventh earth, the hell-beings with Mithyadrishti have touched a countless part of the world, and six parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The remaining three Gunasthana hell-beings have touched a countless part of the world. In the realm of the animals, the animals with Mithyadrishti have touched the entire world. The animals with Sasadan Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world, and seven parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The animals with Samyag Mithyadrishti have touched a countless part of the world. The animals with Asanyata Samyagdristi and the restrained and unrestrained animals have touched a countless part of the world, and six parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. In the realm of humans, the humans with Mithyadrishti have touched a countless part of the world, or the entire world. The humans with Sasadan Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world, and seven parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The touch of the Samyag Mithyadrishti, etc., up to the Aayog Kevali, is like that of a field. In the realm of gods, the gods with Mithyadrishti and Sasadan Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world. The touch of the heedless, restrained, etc., up to the Aayog Kevali, is like that of a field.
876. **Visheshki Apeksha Gati Marganake Anuvaadase:** In particular, according to the theory of motion, in the first earth of the hell-realm, the hell-beings with Mithyadrishti, etc., with four Gunasthana, have touched a countless part of the world. In the second and subsequent earths up to the sixth, the hell-beings with Mithyadrishti and Sasadan Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world, and one, two, three, four, and five parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The hell-beings with Samyag Mithyadrishti and Asanyata Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world. In the seventh earth, the hell-beings with Mithyadrishti have touched a countless part of the world, and six parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The remaining three Gunasthana hell-beings have touched a countless part of the world. In the realm of the animals, the animals with Mithyadrishti have touched the entire world. The animals with Sasadan Samyagdristi have touched a countless part of the world, and seven parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. The animals with Samyag Mithyadrishti have touched a countless part of the world. The animals with Asanyata Samyagdristi and the restrained and unrestrained animals have touched a countless part of the world, and six parts less than fourteen parts of the world-nadi. In the realm of humans,
1. - दृष्टिभिः संयता - मु. ता. न. । 2. दृष्टिभिः सासा   ता. । 3. ऊपर अच्युत कल्पतक छह राजु । इसमें से चित्रा पृथिवीका एक हजार योजन व आरण अच्युत कल्पके उपरिम विमानोंके ऊपरका भाग छोड़ देना चाहिए। यह स्पर्श मारणान्तिक समुद्घातकी अपेक्षा प्राप्त होता है। 4. मेरुपर्वतके मूलसे ऊपर सात राजु | यह स्पर्शन मारणान्तिक समुद्घातकी अपेक्षा प्राप्त होता है । यद्यपि तिर्यच सासादन सम्यग्दृष्टि जीव मेरुपर्वतके मूलसे नीचे भवनवासियोंमें मारणान्तिक समुद्घात करते हुए पाये जाते हैं तथापि इतने मात्रसे
र्शन क्षेत्र सात राजुसे अधिक न होकर कम ही रहता है। ऐसे जीव मेरुपर्वतके मूलसे नीचे एकेन्द्रियोंमें व नारकियों में मारणान्तिक समुद्घात नहीं करते यह उक्त कथनका तात्पर्य है। 5. ऊपर अच्युत कला तक छह राजु | इसमे से चित्रा पृथिवीका एक हजार योजन व आरण अच्युत कल्पके उपरिम विमानोंके ऊपरका भाग छोड़ देना चाहिए। यह स्पर्श मारणान्तिक समुद्घातकी अपेक्षा प्राप्त होता है ।

Page #155:
---------------------------
-118 § 79]
Chapter One
[ 35
An uncountable portion of the world, or eight, nine, and fourteen parts less, is touched by the Mithyadrishti. A countable portion of the world, or eight and fourteen parts less, is touched by the Samyak, Mithyadrishti, and restrained Samyakdrishti.
877. By the translation of the senses, the one-sensed have touched all the world. The partially-sensed have touched an uncountable portion of the world, or all the world. Among the five-sensed, the Mithyadrishti have touched an uncountable portion of the world, or eight, nine, and fourteen parts less, or all the world. The touch of the rest is general.
$ 78. By the translation of the body, the stationary-bodied have touched all the world. The touch of the trembling-bodied is like that of the five-sensed. The Mithyadrishti have touched an uncountable portion of the world, or eight, nine, and fourteen parts less, or all the world. The touch of the rest is general.
$ 79. By the translation of yoga, the speech-minded and mind-minded have touched an uncountable portion of the world, or eight, nine, and fourteen parts less, or all the world. The touch of the Sasadan Samyakdrishti, etc., up to the Kshina-Kshaya, is general. The Sayoga-Kevali have touched an uncountable portion of the world. The touch of the Kayayogi, Mithyadrishti, etc., up to the Sayoga-Kevali Mithyadrishti, is general.

Page #156:
---------------------------
## 36j Sarvarthasiddhi

**[118880] General statement of the touch of the Ayogakevali and the Sayogakevali.**

**80.**  By the translation of the Vedas, the *stri-pum-veda* (male and female vedis) with *mithyadristi* (false vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or eight parts out of fourteen, or less, or the whole world. The *sasadan-samyagdristi* (those who have attained the right vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or eight parts out of fourteen, or less, or nine parts out of fourteen, or less. The general statement of the touch of the *samyag-mithyadristi* (those who have attained the right vision) to the *anivritti-badar* (those who have attained the state of non-return) is the same. In the *napumsak-veda* (neuter vedis), the general statement of the touch of the *mithyadristi* and the *sasadan-samyagdristi* is the same. The *samp-mithyadristi* (those who have attained the right vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world. The *asanyata-samyagdristi* (those who have attained the right vision but are not restrained) and the *sanyata-sanyata* (those who are restrained) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or six parts out of fourteen, or less. The general statement of the touch of the *pramatta* (those who are careless) to the *anivritti-badar* (those who have attained the state of non-return) and those who have abandoned the Vedas is the same.

**What is the touch of the *Ogh* (stream)?**

The touch of the *Sayogakevali* (those who have attained the state of liberation) is an innumerable part of the world. Similarly, the touch of the *Kayayogi* (those who have attained the state of liberation) from the *mithyadristi* (false vision) to the *Sayogakevali* (those who have attained the state of liberation) and the *Ayogakevali* (those who have attained the state of liberation) is the same as the touch of the *Ogh* (stream).

**6 80.** By the translation of the *Veda-margana* (the path of the Vedas), the *mithyadristi* (false vision) *stri-vedi* (female vedis) and *purusha-vedi* (male vedis) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or eight parts out of fourteen, or less, or the whole world. The *sasadan-samyagdristi* (those who have attained the right vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or eight parts out of fourteen, or less, or nine parts out of fourteen, or less. The touch of the *samyag-mithyadristi* (those who have attained the right vision) to the *dar* (those who have attained the state of liberation) is the same as the touch of the *Ogh* (stream). In the *napumsak-veda* (neuter vedis), the touch of the *mithyadristi* (false vision) and the *sasadan-samyagdristi* (those who have attained the right vision) is the same as the touch of the *Ogh* (stream). The *samyag-mithyadristi* (those who have attained the right vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world. The *asanyata-samyagdristi* (those who have attained the right vision but are not restrained) and the *sanyata-sanyata* (those who are restrained) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or six parts out of fourteen, or less. Similarly, the touch of the *pramatta-sanyata* (those who are careless and restrained) to the *anivritti-badar* (those who have attained the state of non-return) is the same as the touch of the *Ogh* (stream).

**1.** *Stri-pum-veda* (male and female vedis). **2.** Eight, nine, fourteen. **3.** The whole world. In the *napumsak-veda* (neuter vedis). **4.** The *samyag-mithyadristi* (those who have attained the right vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world. The *sasadan-samyagdristi* (those who have attained the right vision) have touched an innumerable part of the world, or eight parts out of fourteen, or less, or nine parts out of fourteen, or less. The general statement of the touch of the *samyag-mithyadristi* (those who have attained the right vision) to the *anivritti-badar* (those who have attained the state of non-return) is the same. The *asanyata-samyag* (those who have attained the right vision but are not restrained). **5.** In the *samudghata* (the time of the great deluge), there is no *manoyoga* (mental concentration) or *vacanayoga* (verbal concentration). Therefore, the touch of the *vacanayogi* (those who have attained verbal concentration) and the *manoyogi* (those who have attained mental concentration) and the *Sayogakevali* (those who have attained the state of liberation) is said to be an innumerable part of the world. **6.** Two *raju* (a unit of measurement) less than the bottom of *Meru* (the mountain) and six *raju* above. This touch is obtained in relation to the *viharavat-sthana* (the state of wandering), *vedana* (sensation), *kasaya* (passions), and *vaikriyik* (the state of change). The touch of the whole world is obtained in relation to the *maranantik* (the state of death) and the *uppadik* (the state of birth). **7.** Two *raju* (a unit of measurement) less than the bottom of *Meru* (the mountain) and six *raju* above. This touch is obtained in relation to the *viharavat-sthana* (the state of wandering), *vedana* (sensation), *kasaya* (passions), and *vaikriyik* (the state of change). **8.** Two *raju* (a unit of measurement) less than the bottom of *Meru* (the mountain) and seven *raju* above. This touch is obtained in relation to the *maranantik* (the state of death). Here, the touch of eleven *ghana-raju* (a unit of measurement) is obtained in relation to the *uppa

Page #157:
---------------------------
-118 § 85]
$ 81. The touch of the four *kṣayās* and the *akṣayās* is said to be the same due to the *kṣayā* transference.
$ 82. The touch of the *matya-jñānī*, *śruta-jñānī*, *mithyā-dṛṣṭi*, and *sāsādan-samyak-dṛṣṭi* is said to be the same due to the *jñāna* transference. The *mithyā-dṛṣṭi* of the *vibhanga-jñānī* is an immeasurable part of the world, eight out of fourteen *loka-nādī* parts less, or the whole world. The touch of the *sāsādan-samyak-dṛṣṭi* is said to be the same. The touch of the *ābhini-bodhika*, *adhi-jñānī*, *manaḥ-paryaya-jñānī*, and *kevala-jñānī* is said to be the same.
Chapter One
[37
$ 83. The touch of all the *samyata*, *samyata-samyata*, and *asam-yata* is said to be the same due to the *samyama* transference.
$ 84. The touch of the *mithyā-dṛṣṭi* to the *kṣīṇa-kṣayānta* with *cakṣu-darśana* is the same as the five senses due to the *darśana* transference. The touch of the *mithyā-dṛṣṭi* to the *kṣīṇa-kṣayānta* with *achakṣu-darśana*, and the *avadhi-darśana* and *kevala-darśana* is said to be the same.
$ 85. The touch of the whole world is made by the *mithyā-dṛṣṭi* with *kṛṣṇa*, *nīla*, and *kāpota* *leśyā*. The touch of an immeasurable part of the world, five, four, and two out of fourteen *loka-nādī* parts less, is made by the *sāsādan-samyak-dṛṣṭi*. The touch of an immeasurable part of the world is made by the *samyak-mithyā-dṛṣṭi* and *asam-yata-samyak-dṛṣṭi*. The touch of an immeasurable part of the world, eight out of fourteen *loka-nādī* parts less, is made by the *mithyā-dṛṣṭi* and *sāsādan-samyak-dṛṣṭi* with *tejo-leśyā*. The *samyak-mithyā-dṛṣṭi* and *samyata-samyak-dṛṣṭi* with *

1 *vā* *deśo-nāḥ*. *dvādaśa-bhāgāḥ* *kuto* *na* *labhyante* *iti* *cet* *tatrāvasthita-leśyā-pekṣayā* *pañcaiva*. *athavā* *yeṣāṁ* *mate* *sāsādan* *eka-indriyeṣu* *notpadyate* *tan-matā-pekṣayā* *dvādaśa-bhāgāḥ* *na* *dattāḥ*. *samyak-jñyā-mu.,* *ā.,* *di.* 112. This touch is obtained in relation to the *vihāra-vat-sthāna*, *vedanā*, *kṣayā*, and *vaikriyika* *pada*, because movement is seen in the two *rāju* below and the six *rāju* above. 3. This touch is obtained in relation to the *māraṇāntika* *pada*. Because these beings are found to be *māraṇāntika* in all the worlds. 4. This touch is explained in relation to the *māraṇāntika* and *upāpada*. The touch of the *kṛṣṇa-leśyā* is five *rāju* less, the *nīla-leśyā* is four *rāju* less, and the *kāpota-leśyā* is two *rāju* less. This touch is possible only for those who are born in the *nārki* and *sāsādan-samyak-dṛṣṭi*.

Page #158:
---------------------------
##  Sarvarthasiddhi 

**381**

**[118882...**

* **For the *Alesh*ya*:**  The *Alesh*ya touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion and in the *lokanādi* in eight out of fourteen parts, or less. 
* **For the *Samyata-Samyata*:** The *Samyata-Samyata* touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion and in the *lokanādi* in nine out of fourteen parts, or less.
* **For the *Pramatta-Pramatta*:** The *Pramatta-Pramatta* touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion.

* **For those with *Padma-Leshya* from *Mithyadrishti* to *Asamyata-Samyagdristi*:** They touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion and in the *lokanādi* in eight out of fourteen parts, or less.
* **For the *Samyata-Samyata*:** They touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion and in the *lokanādi* in five out of fourteen parts, or less.
* **For the *Pramatta-Pramatta*:** They touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion.

* **For those with *Shukla-Leshya* from *Mithyadrishti* to *Samyata-Samyata*:** They touch the *loka* in an immeasurable portion and in the *lokanādi* in six out of fourteen parts, or less.

**The touch of the *Pramatta-Samyata* etc. up to the *S*ayoga-Kevali* with *Shukla-Leshya* and the *Alesh*ya is like a current.**

1. This touch is obtained in relation to *vihara*, *vedana*, *k*ashaya*, and *vaikriyika* stages, because the *P*ita-Leshya* *S*as*adana* are seen to move in two *raju* less below and six *raju* above.
2. This touch is obtained in relation to *maran*antika* *samud*gh*ata*, because such beings are found to perform *maran*antika* *samud*gh*ata* in nine *raju* less above the third earth. It should be known here that their touch in relation to the *up*ap*ada* stage is one and a half *raju* less.
3. This touch is obtained in relation to *vihara*, *vedana*, *k*ashaya*, *vaikriyika*, and *maran*antika* stages. The reasoning has already been explained. The special feature is that there is no *maran*antika* *samud*gh*ata* in the *mishra* *guna-sth*ana*.
4. This touch is obtained in relation to the *maran*antika* stage. They do not have the *up*ap*ada* stage.
5. This touch is obtained in relation to *vihara*, *vedana*, *k*ashaya*, *vaikriyika*, and *maran*antika* stages. Their touch in relation to the *up*ap*ada* stage is five *raju* less. The special feature is that there is no *maran*antika* and *up*ap*ada* stage in the *mishra* *guna-sth*ana*.
6. This touch is obtained in relation to the *maran*antika* stage, because the *Samyata-Samyata* with *Padma-Leshya* are found to perform *maran*antika* *samud*gh*ata* in five *raju* less above.
7. This touch is obtained in relation to *vihara*, *vedana*, *k*ashaya*, *vaikriyika*, and *maran*antika* stages. This statement is made in relation to the four *guna-sth*ana* from *Mithyadrishti* etc. The *Samyata-Samyata* with *Shukla-Leshya* obtain touch in relation to *vihara*, *vedana*, *k*ashaya*, and *vaikriyika* stages only in an immeasurable portion of the *loka*. The touch of the *Mithyadrishti* and *S*as*adana-Samyagdristi* with *Shukla-Leshya* in relation to the *up*ap*ada* stage is in an immeasurable portion of the *loka*. The touch of the *Avirata-Samyagdristi* with *Shukla-Leshya* is six *raju* less. The *Samyata-Samyata* do not have the *up*ap*ada* stage. Nevertheless, their touch in relation to *maran*antika* *samud*gh*ata* becomes six *raju* less.

Page #159:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1
**886.** The touch of the **bhavyas** (those destined for liberation) is the same as the **ogha** (stream) from the **pathya** (those who follow the right path) to the **ayogakevali** (those who have attained liberation without any effort). The **abhavya** (those who are not destined for liberation) have touched all beings.

**887.** The touch of the **kshayika samyagdrsti** (those who have destroyed their karmas) from the **asamyata samyagdrsti** (those who have not yet attained complete control over their senses) to the **ayogakevali** is the same as the **ogha**. However, the touch of the **samyata samyata** (those who have attained complete control over their senses) is a fraction of the **loka** (universe). The touch of the **kshayopashamaka samyagdrsti** (those who are on the path of destroying their karmas) is the same as the **ogha**. The touch of the **asamyata samyagdrsti** (those who have not yet attained complete control over their senses) is the same as the **ogha**. The touch of the remaining **opashamaka samyagdrsti** (those who are on the path of destroying their karmas) is a fraction of the **loka**. The touch of the **sasadan samyagdrsti** (those who have attained the first stage of liberation), **sarvagami mithyadrsti** (those who have attained the highest stage of the wrong path), and **mithyadrsti** (those who are on the wrong path) is the same as the **ogha**.

**888.** The touch of the **sanjnas** (those who have attained the knowledge of the self) is the same as the **chakshudarsana** (those who have attained the vision of the self) beings. The **asanjnas** (those who have not attained the knowledge of the self) have touched all beings. The touch of those who are devoid of both these characteristics is the same as the **ogha**.

**889.** The touch of the **aharakas** (those who consume food) from the **mithyadrsti** to the **kshinakashaya** (those who have destroyed their karmas) is the same as the **ogha**. The touch of the **sayogakevali** is a fraction of the **loka**. Among the **anahakaras** (those who do not consume food), the **mithyadrsti** have touched all beings. The **sasadan samyagdrsti** have touched a fraction of the **loka** and eleven out of fourteen parts of the **lokanadi** (the path of the universe). The **asamyata samyagdrsti** have touched a fraction of the **loka** and six out of fourteen parts of the **lokanadi**. The **sayogakevali** have touched a fraction of the **loka** and all beings. The **ayogakevali** have touched a fraction of the **loka**. This is the explanation of touch.

**890.** Now we will discuss **kala** (time). It is of two types: **samanya** (general) and **vishesha** (specific). In general, the **mithyadrsti** has touched all time in relation to the **ajiva** (non-living beings). In relation to the **jiva** (living beings), there are three types of time:

1. **Anadi** (beginningless) and **saryava** (ending) - This is the time from the **meru** (mountain) to the **tal** (bottom) and above, less than five **raju** (a unit of measurement) and six **raju** respectively. This touch is attained in relation to the **uppapada** (birth).
2. **Anadi** (beginningless) and **saryava** (ending) - This is the time from the **meru** to the **tal** and above, less than the **achyuta kalpa** (a unit of time). The **tiryanch** (animals) and **asamyata samyagdrsti** are born in the **achyuta kalpa** after death, so this touch is attained in relation to the **uppapada**.

Page #160:
---------------------------
## 40] Sarvarthasiddhi

[118891]  Sadi, Sadi-Saparyavasan, etc.  Here, Sadi-Saparyavasan is an Antarmuhurta for a Jayanya.  For an Utkarhsa, it is less than half a Pudgala-Parivarta.  For a Sa-Sadana-Samyagdrsti, it is one Samaya for a non-Jiva, and for an Utkarhsa, it is an uncountable fraction of a Palya-Upamana.  For a single Jiva, it is one Samaya for a Jghanya, and for an Utkarhsa, it is six Avalikas.  For a Samyag-Mithyadrsti, it is an Antarmuhurta for a non-Jiva, and for an Utkarhsa, it is an uncountable fraction of a Palya-Upamana.  For a single Jiva, both Jghanya and Utkarhsa are Antarmuhurta.  For an Asanyata-Samyagdrsti, it is all time for a non-Jiva, and for a single Jiva, it is an Antarmuhurta for a Jghanya, and for an Utkarhsa, it is a number equal to thirty-three Sagara-Upamana with one added.  For a Samyata-Asanyata, it is all time for a non-Jiva, and for a single Jiva, it is not an Antarmuhurta for a Jghanya, and for an Utkarhsa, it is less than a Purva-Koti.  For a Pramatta-Apramatta, it is all time for a non-Jiva, and for a single Jiva, it is one Samaya for a Jghanya, and for an Utkarhsa, it is an Antarmuhurta.  For the four Upshama, it is one Samaya for both a non-Jiva and a single Jiva for a Jghanya, and for an Utkarhsa, it is an Antarmuhurta.  For the four Kshapaka, Ayoga-Kevali, it is both Jghanya and Utkarhsa Antarmuhurta for both a non-Jiva and a single Jiva.  For a Yoga-Kevali, it is all time for a non-Jiva, and for a single Jiva, it is an Antarmuhurta for a Jghanya, and for an Utkarhsa, it is less than a Purva-Koti.

91.  Specifically, in the translation of the movement, in the hell-bound, in the seven earths of the Narakas, in the Mithyadrsti, there is always a Jiva and a non-Jiva.  There are three types of Jivas: Anadi-Ananta, Anadi-Santa, and Sadi-Santa.  Of these, the Sadi-Santa Mithyadrstika has a Jghanya time of Antarmuhurta and an Utkarhsa time of slightly less than half a Pudgala-Parivarta.  For a Sa-Sadana-Samyagdrsti, the Jghanya time for a non-Jiva is one Samaya, and the Utkarhsa time is an uncountable fraction of a Palya-Upamana.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is one Samaya, and the Utkarhsa time is six Avalikas.  For a Samyag-Mithyadrstika, the Jghanya time for a non-Jiva is an Antarmuhurta, and the Utkarhsa time is an uncountable fraction of a Palya-Upamana.  For a single Jiva, both Jghanya and Utkarhsa time are Antarmuhurta.  For an Asanyata-Samyagdrsti, it is all time for a non-Jiva.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is an Antarmuhurta, and the Utkarhsa time is thirty-three Sagara-Upamana with one added.  For a Samyata-Asanyata, it is all time for a non-Jiva.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is an Antarmuhurta, and the Utkarhsa time is less than a Purva-Koti.  For a Pramatta-Samyata and Apramatta-Samyata, it is all time for a non-Jiva.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is one Samaya, and the Utkarhsa time is an Antarmuhurta.  For the four Upshama, the Jghanya time for both a non-Jiva and a single Jiva is one Samaya, and the Utkarhsa time is an Antarmuhurta.  For the four Kshapaka and Ayoga-Kevali, the Jghanya and Utkarhsa time for both a non-Jiva and a single Jiva is an Antarmuhurta.  For a Yoga-Kevali, it is all time for a non-Jiva.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is an Antarmuhurta, and the Utkarhsa time is less than a Purva-Koti.

91.  With respect to the specific movement, in the translation of the hell-bound, in the seven earths of the Narakas, there is always a Jiva and a non-Jiva.  There are three types of Jivas: Anadi-Ananta, Anadi-Santa, and Sadi-Santa.  Of these, the Sadi-Santa Mithyadrstika has a Jghanya time of Antarmuhurta and an Utkarhsa time of slightly less than half a Pudgala-Parivarta.  For a Sa-Sadana-Samyagdrsti, the Jghanya time for a non-Jiva is one Samaya, and the Utkarhsa time is an uncountable fraction of a Palya-Upamana.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is one Samaya, and the Utkarhsa time is six Avalikas.  For a Samyag-Mithyadrstika, the Jghanya time for a non-Jiva is an Antarmuhurta, and the Utkarhsa time is an uncountable fraction of a Palya-Upamana.  For a single Jiva, both Jghanya and Utkarhsa time are Antarmuhurta.  For an Asanyata-Samyagdrsti, it is all time for a non-Jiva.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is an Antarmuhurta, and the Utkarhsa time is thirty-three Sagara-Upamana with one added.  For a Samyata-Asanyata, it is all time for a non-Jiva.  For a single Jiva, the Jghanya time is an Antarmuhurta

Page #161:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**For the Mithyadrishti (false-sighted) in the state of Tiryanch (animal), the time is all time in relation to many beings. In relation to one being, the least time is an Antarmuhurta (a very short time), and the greatest time is infinite time, which is equal to countless Pudgala (matter) transformations. For the Sasadan Samyagdristi (right-sighted with the right faith), Samyagmithyadristi (right-false-sighted), and the restrained and unrestrained Tiryanch, the time is the same. For the unrestrained Samyagdristi, the time is all time in relation to many beings. In relation to one being, the least time is an Antarmuhurta, and the greatest time is slightly less than the greatest time mentioned above.**

**For the Mithyadrishti in the state of Manushya (human), the time is all time in relation to many beings. In relation to one being, the least time is an Antarmuhurta, and the greatest time is three Palya (a measure of time) greater than the previous Koti (a measure of time). For the Sasadan Samyagdristi, the least time in relation to many beings is one Samaya (a measure of time), and the greatest time is an Antarmuhurta. In relation to one being, the least time is one Samaya, and the greatest time is six Avalika (a measure of time). For the Samyagmithyadristi, the time is neither less nor greater than the Antarmuhurta in relation to both one being and many beings.**

**For the unrestrained Samyagdristi, the time is all time in relation to many beings. In relation to one being, the least time is an Antarmuhurta, and the greatest time is three Palya, slightly greater than the previous Koti.**

**There are some special features:**

1. **In the first six Narakas (hells), the Mithyadrishti is born with Mithyatva (false-sight), and then after an Antarmuhurta, they are born with Samyaktva (right-sight) and remain with Samyaktva for the rest of their life, achieving the greatest time. However, in the seventh Naraka, both entry and exit are with Mithyatva.**
2. **Here, an uncountable number of Avalika is taken as an uncountable part.**
3. **Here, forty-seven previous Koti are taken from the previous Koti.** Although the word "Prithaktva" indicates a number greater than three and less than nine, here, forty-seven is taken from the word "Prithaktva" due to the abundance.
4. **Here, a slightly less than three-part of the previous Koti is taken from the word "Sadhik".** For example, a human with a lifespan of one Koti who has bound his lifespan in the three parts, then attains the Kshayik Samyagdarshan (right-sight) with Samyaktva in the Antarmuhurta and dies at the end of his lifespan and is born in the best Bhogbhumi (land of enjoyment) with a lifespan of three Palya, he achieves the greatest time of the uninterrupted Samyagdristi.

Page #162:
---------------------------
## 42]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[118 893. For those with Asamyata Samyagdristi, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is Antarmuhurta, and the maximum time is three times the size of the universe, plus one. For the rest, the time is as stated generally.
894. For those with Mithyadristi in the Devagati, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is Antarmuhurta, and the maximum time is thirty-one times the size of the universe. For those with Sasadan Samyagdristi and Samyag Mithyadristi, the time is as stated generally. For those with Asamyata Samyagdristi, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is Antarmuhurta, and the maximum time is thirty-three times the size of the universe.
895. For those with Ekendriya, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is the duration of a small Bhavagrahan, and the maximum time is infinite, with countless Pudgala Parivartas. For those with Vikalendriya, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is the duration of a small Bhavagrahan, and the maximum time is thousands of years. For those with Panchendriya and Mithyadristi, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is Antarmuhurta, and the maximum time is a thousand times the size of the universe, plus one koti (ten million) times the size of the universe. For the rest, the time is as stated generally.
896. For those with Prithvi, Ap, Tejo, and Vayu Kayika, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is the duration of a small Bhavagrahan, and the maximum time is countless Lokas. For those with Vanaspati Kayika, the time is the same as for Ekendriya. For those with Trasa Kayika and Mithyadristi, the time is all time with respect to all beings. For one being, the minimum time is Antarmuhurta, and the maximum time is two thousand times the size of the universe, plus one koti (ten million) times the size of the universe. For the rest, the time is the same as for Panchendriya.
897. For those with Vachanayogi and Manayogi, the time is the same as for Mithyadristi, Asamyata Samyagdristi, Samyata Samyagdristi, Pramatta Samyata, and the rest. ]

Page #163:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**For those with diverse living beings, the time is all time, for those with one living being, the least time is one moment, and the greatest time is an antarmuhurta. For those with the right view with enjoyment, the general time is as stated. For those with the right and wrong view, the least time is one moment, and the greatest time is an uncountable part of a palya. For one living being, the least time is one moment, and the greatest time is an antarmuhurta. For the four upshamaka and the four kshapaka, the least time is one moment for both diverse living beings and one living being, and the greatest time is an antarmuhurta. For those with the body yoga and the wrong view, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is one moment for one living being, and the greatest time is infinite time, which is an uncountable number of pudgala transformations. The rest are like those with the mind yoga, and those without yoga are like the general.**

**According to the Vedic translation, for those with the wrong view in the female Vedas, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is one hundred palya. The general time is from the right view with enjoyment to the end of the anivritti badara. But for those with the unrestrained right view, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is fifty-five palya less than the country. For those with the wrong view in the male Vedas, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is one hundred sagara. The general time is from the right view with enjoyment to the end of the anivritti badara. For those with the wrong view in the neuter Vedas, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is one hundred sagara.**

**For the restrained and unrestrained, the distracted and undistracted, and the syogikevali, the time is all time for diverse living beings. For one living being, the least time is one moment, and the greatest time is an antarmuhurta. The general time is for those with the right view with enjoyment. For those with the right and wrong view, the least time is one moment for diverse living beings, and the greatest time is an uncountable part of a palya. For one living being, the least time is one moment, and the greatest time is an antarmuhurta. For the four upshamaka and the four kshapaka, the least time is one moment for both diverse living beings and one living being, and the greatest time is an antarmuhurta. For those with the body yoga and the wrong view, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is one moment for one living being, and the greatest time is infinite time, which is an uncountable number of pudgala transformations. The rest are like those with the mind yoga, and those without yoga are like the general.**

**According to the Vedic translation, for those with the wrong view in the female Vedas, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is one hundred palya. The general time is from the right view with enjoyment to the end of the anivritti badara. But for those with the unrestrained right view, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is fifty-five palya less than the country. For those with the wrong view in the male Vedas, the time is all time for diverse living beings, the least time is an antarmuhurta for one living being, and the greatest time is one hundred sagara. The general time is from the right view with enjoyment to the end of the anivritti badara.**

**1. The least time for mind yoga, speech yoga, and body yoga is one moment. The yoga paravritti, guna paravritti, death, and vyaghata are the four types. Of these, the wrong view, the unrestrained right view, the restrained and unrestrained, and the distracted and undistracted are all four types possible. For the undistracted and undistracted, only three types are possible without vyaghata, because vyaghata and the undistracted nature are mutually exclusive. For the syogikevali, the least time is one moment only with one yoga paravritti. 2. Without death, the remaining three types can occur here, and the least time is one moment. 3. Without the vyaghata of the upshamaka, three types are possible, and without the death and vyaghata of the kshapaka, two types are possible, and the least time is one moment. 4. The greatest lifespan of a goddess is fifty-five palya. If we subtract the initial antarmuhurta time, the greatest time for the unrestrained right view in the female Vedas is fifty-five palya less. 5. More than three hundred sagara and less than nine hundred sagara.**

Page #164:
---------------------------
##  **Translation of the Jain Text:**

**441 Sarvarthasiddhi**

**[118898]**  In relation to all beings, time is infinite. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta (a fraction of a muhūrta, which is 48 minutes). The longest time is infinite, measured by countless pudgala transformations. This is the same for all beings from those with sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi (right faith with attachment) to those with anivṛtti-bādar (complete cessation of karma).

**[899]** For those with asamyata samyagdṛṣṭi (right faith without restraint), time is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is less than thirty sāgara (oceans). This is the same for all beings without vedas (scriptural knowledge).

**[899]** In relation to the four kṣayās (passions) through kṣayā-anuvāda (the process of diminishing passions), the time for those with mithyādṛṣṭi (false faith) to those with apramātta-samyata (perfect restraint) is the same as for those with manoyoga (mental concentration). The time for the two upaśamaka (passions that cause suffering), the two kṣapaka (passions that cause destruction), those with only lobha (greed), and those without kṣayās is the same.

**[8100]** In relation to knowledge through jñāna-anuvāda (the process of gaining knowledge), the time for those with matyajñāna (knowledge of death) and śrutājñāna (knowledge from scriptures) is the same as for those with mithyādṛṣṭi and sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi. For those with vibhaṅga-jñāna (knowledge of the destruction of karma), time is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is less than thirty sāgara. The time for those with sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi is the same. The time for those with ābhinibodika-jñāna (knowledge of the subtle), śruta-avadhi-jñāna (knowledge of the past), manaḥ-paryaya-jñāna (knowledge of the mind), and kevala-jñāna (omniscience) is the same.

**[101]** In relation to restraint through samyamā-anuvāda (the process of gaining restraint), the time for those with sāmayika-samyata (restraint through daily meditation), chheda-upasthāpana-samyata (restraint through the destruction of karma), pariharā-viśuddhi-samyata (restraint through purification), sūṣma-sāmprāya-samyata (restraint through subtle practice), yathākhyāta-viśuddhi-samyata (restraint through perfect purity), samyata-samyata (restraint through restraint), and the four asamyata (unrestrained) is the same.

**[102]** In relation to perception through darśana-anuvāda (the process of gaining perception), the time for those with cakṣu-darśana (visual perception) and mithyādṛṣṭi is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is two thousand sāgara. The time for those with sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi and others with kṣīṇa-kṣayā (diminished passions) is the same.

**[102]** For those with napuṃsaka-veda (knowledge of the neuter gender), the time for mithyādṛṣṭi is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is infinite, measured by countless pudgala transformations. This is the same for all beings from those with sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi to those with anivṛtti-bādar. However, for those with asamyata samyagdṛṣṭi, time is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is less than thirty sāgara. This is the same for all beings without vedas.

**[899]** In relation to the four kṣayās through kṣayā-anuvāda, the time for those with mithyādṛṣṭi to those with apramātta-samyata is the same as for those with manoyoga. The time for the two upaśamaka, the two kṣapaka, those with only lobha, and those without kṣayās is the same.

**[100]** In relation to knowledge through jñāna-anuvāda, the time for those with matyajñāna and śrutājñāna is the same as for those with mithyādṛṣṭi and sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi. For those with vibhaṅga-jñāna, time is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is less than thirty sāgara. The time for those with sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi is the same. The time for those with ābhinibodika-jñāna, śruta-avadhi-jñāna, manaḥ-paryaya-jñāna, and kevala-jñāna is the same.

**[101]** In relation to restraint through samyamā-anuvāda, the time for those with sāmayika-samyata, chheda-upasthāpana-samyata, pariharā-viśuddhi-samyata, sūṣma-sāmprāya-samyata, yathākhyāta-viśuddhi-samyata, samyata-samyata, and the four asamyata is the same.

**[102]** In relation to perception through darśana-anuvāda, the time for those with cakṣu-darśana and mithyādṛṣṭi is infinite in relation to all beings. For a single being, the shortest time is an antarmūhurta. The longest time is two thousand sāgara. The time for those with sā-sādana samyagdṛṣṭi and others with kṣīṇa-kṣayā is the same.

**Notes:**

1. This

Page #165:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1: General Time Span

**145.** This chapter discusses the general time span for those who have attained the state of **Kshaya** (exhaustion of karmas) in the context of **Mithyadrishti** (false belief). The time span for **Avadhi** (clairvoyance) and **Kevala** (omniscience) is the same as that of **Avadhijnani** (clairvoyant) and **Kevalajnani** (omniscient) respectively.

**8103.** Based on the **Leshya** (color) classification, for those with **Mithyadrishti** in the **Krishna**, **Neela**, and **Kapota** Leshyas, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta** (a fraction of a Muhurta). The maximum time span is **33 Sagaropama** (33 times the size of the ocean), **17 Sagaropama**, and **7 Sagaropama** respectively, all with an additional **Atirek** (increment).

The general time span for **Sasaadana** (initial stage of right faith) and **Samyagmithyadrishti** (right faith with false belief) is the same.

For those with **Asanyata Samyagdristi** (right faith without restraint), the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **33 Sagaropama**, **17 Sagaropama**, and **7 Sagaropama** respectively, all with a **Deshon** (decrement).

For those with **Mithyadrishti** in the **Peeta** and **Padma** Leshyas, and those with **Asanyata Samyagdristi**, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **2 Sagaropama** and **18 Sagaropama** respectively, both with an additional **Atirek**.

The general time span for **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** and **Samyagmithyadrishti** is the same.

For **Sanyata** (restrained), **Asanyata** (unrestrained), **Pramatta** (distracted), and **Apramatta** (undistracted) beings, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Eka Samaya** (one moment). The maximum time span is **Antarmuhurta**.

For those with **Mithyadrishti** in the **Shukla** Leshya, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **31 Sagaropama** with an additional **Atirek**.

The general time span for **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** to **Sayogakevali** (liberated by association) and those without **Leshya** is **1000 Sagaropama**. This is the general time span for each stage from **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** to **Kshaya**. This is also the general time span for each stage from **Mithyadrishti** to **Kshaya** for those with **Achakshudarshana** (clairvoyance without eyes). The time span for **Avadhi** and **Kevala** is the same as that of **Avadhijnani** and **Kevalajnani** respectively.

**8103.** Based on the **Leshya** classification, for those with **Mithyadrishti** in the **Krishna**, **Neela**, and **Kapota** Leshyas, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **33 Sagaropama**, **17 Sagaropama**, and **7 Sagaropama** respectively, all with an additional **Atirek**.

The general time span for **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** and **Samyagmithyadrishti** is the same.

For those with **Asanyata Samyagdristi**, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **33 Sagaropama**, **17 Sagaropama**, and **7 Sagaropama** respectively, all with a **Deshon** (decrement).

For those with **Peeta** and **Padma** Leshyas, and those with **Asanyata Samyagdristi**, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **2 Sagaropama** and **18 Sagaropama** respectively, both with an additional **Atirek**.

The general time span for **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** and **Samyagmithyadrishti** is the same.

For **Sanyata** (restrained), **Asanyata** (unrestrained), **Pramatta** (distracted), and **Apramatta** (undistracted) beings, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Eka Samaya** (one moment). The maximum time span is **Antarmuhurta**.

For those with **Mithyadrishti** in the **Shukla** Leshya, the general time span is as follows:

* **For all beings:** The entire duration of time.
* **For a single being:** The minimum time span is **Antarmuhurta**. The maximum time span is **31 Sagaropama** with an additional **Atirek**.

The general time span for **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** to **Sayogakevali** (liberated by association) and those without **Leshya** is **1000 Sagaropama**. This is the general time span for each stage from **Sasaadana Samyagdristi** to **Kshaya**. This is also the general time span for each stage from **Mithyadrishti** to

Page #166:
---------------------------
## 46]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[118 § 103. For the *san̄yata-san̄yata*, the time is all time in relation to many beings. For one being, the least time is one *samaya*. For the best, it is an *antarmuhūrta*.

§ 104. In the translation of the *bhavyas*, for the *mithyādṛṣṭi*, the time is all time in relation to many beings. For one being, there are two *bhaṅgas*: *anādi-sānta* and *sādi-sānta*. Of these, the *sādi-sānta* *bhaṅga* is the least time, an *antarmuhūrta*. For the best, it is a little less than half a *pudgala* transformation. This is the general time for all from the *sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi* to the *ayogakevali*. For the *abhavya*, the time is *anādi-aparyavasan̄a*.

§ 105. In the translation of *samyaktvam*, for the *kṣayika-samyakdṛṣṭi*, the time is the same for all from the *asan̄yata-samyakdṛṣṭi* to the *ayogakevali*. This is the general time for the four *kṣayopasamikasamyakdṛṣṭi*. For the *aupasamikasamyaktvam*, the time is *asan̄yata-samyakdṛṣṭi* and *san̄yata-san̄yata*. For the *san̄yata-san̄yata*, the least time is an *antarmuhūrta* in relation to many beings. For the best, it is an immeasurable part of a *palya*. For one being, the least and best time is an *antarmuhūrta*. For the *pramattasan̄yata*, *apramattasan̄yata*, and the four *upasamaka*, the least time is one *samaya* in relation to many beings and one being. For the best, it is an *antarmuhūrta*. This is the general time for the *sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭi*, *samyagmithyādṛṣṭi*, and *mithyādṛṣṭi*.

§ 106. In the translation of *saṁjñā*, for the *saṁjñi* with *mithyādṛṣṭi* to the *anivṛttibādarānta*, the time is the same as for the *puruṣavedi*. This is the general time for the rest. For the *asan̄jñi*, the time is all time in relation to many beings. For one being, the least time is the size of a small *bhavagrahana*. For the best, it is infinite time, an immeasurable number of *pudgala* transformations. This is the general time for those who are without both *saṁjñi* and *asan̄jñi* characteristics.

1. - For the *jñāna* with *mithyādṛṣṭi*, the time is many *muhūrta*. 1 2 *grahana*. There are thirty-six thousand six hundred thirty-six *marana*. The *antarmuhūrta* is the time of the small *bhavas*. 66336. For the best, it is a *muhūrta*.

Page #167:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**107.** In the case of those who consume food, the time period for the non-liberated soul, in relation to many beings, is all time. In relation to one being, the shortest time is an antarmūhūrta, and the longest time is an immeasurable fraction of an angula, the measure of which is immeasurable immeasurable utsarpini and avasarpini. The general time for the remaining stages is as stated. In the case of those who do not consume food, the time period for the non-liberated soul, in relation to many beings, is all time. In relation to one being, the shortest time is one samaya, and the longest time is three samayas. In the case of the sā-sādana samyak-drishti and the asamyata samyak-drishti, the shortest time in relation to many beings is one samaya, and the longest time is an immeasurable fraction of an avali. In relation to one being, the shortest time is one samaya, and the longest time is two samayas. In the case of the sayoga-kevali, the shortest time in relation to many beings is three samayas, and the longest time is a countable number of samayas. In relation to one being, the shortest and longest time is three samayas. The general time for the ayoga-kevali is as stated. Thus, time has been described.

**108.** Now, the difference is explained. When the desired quality undergoes a transformation into another quality, and then that quality is attained again, the time in between is called the difference. This is of two types: general and specific. In general, there is no difference for the non-liberated soul in relation to many beings. In relation to one being, the shortest difference is an antarmūhūrta, and the longest difference is slightly less than two sixty-sixes of a sagara. The difference for the sā-sādana samyak-drishti, in relation to many beings, is one samaya. The longest difference is an immeasurable fraction of a palya. In relation to one being, the shortest difference is an immeasurable fraction of a palya, and the longest difference is slightly less than half a pudgala-parivarta.

Page #168:
---------------------------
## 48]
**Regarding the difference in time between the attainment of *Sarvarthasiddhi* (perfect knowledge) for different beings:**

* **For those with *Samyagmithyadrishti* (right and wrong faith):** The difference in time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* is similar to that of *Sāsādan* (those who have attained the first stage of liberation). For one being, the minimum time is an *antarmuhūrta* (a fraction of a moment). The maximum time is less than half a *pudgala* (atom) change.
* **For those with *Asamyata Samyagdristi* (uncontrolled right faith) to *Aparamatta Samyata* (perfectly controlled right faith):** There is no difference in time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* for different beings. For one being, the minimum time is an *antarmuhūrta*. The maximum time is less than half a *pudgala* change.
* **For the four *Upasamakas* (those who have attained the second stage of liberation):** The minimum time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* for different beings is one *samaya* (moment). The maximum time is a year. For one being, the minimum time is an *antarmuhūrta*. The maximum time is less than half a *pudgala* change.
* **For the four *Kshapakas* (those who have attained the third stage of liberation) and *Ayogakevali* (those who have attained the fourth stage of liberation):** The minimum time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* for different beings is one *samaya*. The maximum time is six months. For one being, there is no difference in time. For *Sayogakevali* (those who have attained the fifth stage of liberation), there is no difference in time for different beings or for one being.

**8.109. Regarding the difference in time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* for those in hell:**

* **For those in hell with *Mithyadrishti* (wrong faith) and *Asamyata Samyagdristi*:** There is no difference in time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* for different beings. For one being, the minimum time is an *antarmuhūrta*. The maximum time is less than one *sāgaropamā* (ocean-sized) for the first hell, less than three *sāgaropamā* for the second hell, less than seven *sāgaropamā* for the third hell, less than ten *sāgaropamā* for the fourth hell, less than seventeen *sāgaropamā* for the fifth hell, less than twenty-two *sāgaropamā* for the sixth hell, and less than thirty-three *sāgaropamā* for the seventh hell.
* **For those with *Sāsādan Samyagdristi* (those who have attained the first stage of liberation) and *Samyagmithyadrishti*:** The minimum time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* for different beings is one *samaya*. The maximum time is an *asankhyeya* (incalculable) number of *palya* (a very small unit of time). For one being, the minimum time is an *asankhyeya* number of *palya* and the maximum time is less than half a *pudgala* change.

**Notes:**

1. *Sāsādan* can only be attained after falling from the *Gunasthan* (stage of virtue), *Upasama* (second stage of liberation), and *Samyaktva* (right faith). However, a being can attain *Upasama* again after a minimum of an *asankhyeya* number of *palya*. Therefore, the minimum time for *Sāsādan Samyagdristi* is an *asankhyeya* number of *palya*.
2. A being can attain *Upasama* again after an *antarmuhūrta* after falling from the *Upasama* stage. Therefore, the minimum time for the four *Upasamakas* is an *antarmuhūrta*.
3. The maximum time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* in hell is determined by the duration of *Mithyatva* (wrong faith) in the hell. The duration of *Mithyatva* is determined by the duration of *Samyaktva* (right faith) in the hell. The duration of *Samyaktva* is determined by the duration of *Mithyatva* in the hell. This is why the maximum time for attaining *Sarvarthasiddhi* in hell is determined by the duration of *Mithyatva* in the hell.

Page #169:
---------------------------
-118 § 111]
Chapter One
The minimum difference in the lifespan of a single *jiva* in the *tiryanch* realm is an infinitesimal fraction of a *muhurt* and the maximum difference is less than three *palyopamas*.
[49
110 There is no difference in the *mithyadrishti* of *tiryanch* beings in relation to different *jivas*. The minimum difference in relation to a single *jiva* is less than a *muhurt*. The maximum difference is less than three *palyopamas*. The general statement of the four, *sāsādan*, *samyagdṛṣṭi*, etc., is the same.
$ 111. The difference in the *mithyadrishti* of humans in the *manushya* realm is the same as that of *tiryanch* beings. The difference in *sāsādan*, *samyagdṛṣṭi*, and *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi* in relation to different *jivas* is the same as that of *tiryanch* beings. The minimum difference in relation to a single *jiva* is an infinitesimal fraction of a *palyopam* and a *muhurt*. The maximum difference is three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *asamyata samyagdṛṣṭi* in relation to different *jivas* is nonexistent. The minimum difference in relation to a single *jiva* is less than a *muhurt*. The maximum difference is three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The maximum difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *sāgaropamas*, less than seven *sāgaropamas*, less than ten *sāgaropamas*, less than seventeen *sāgaropamas*, less than twenty-two *sāgaropamas*, and less than thirty-three *sāgaropamas*.
$ 110. In the *tiryanch* realm, there is no difference in the *mithyadrishti* of *tiryanch* beings in relation to different *jivas*. The minimum difference in relation to a single *jiva* is less than a *muhurt*. The maximum difference is less than three *palyopamas*. The general statement of the four, *sāsādan*, *samyagdṛṣṭi*, etc., is the same.
$ 111. In the *manushya* realm, the difference in the *mithyadrishti* of humans is the same as that of *tiryanch* beings. The difference in *sāsādan*, *samyagdṛṣṭi*, and *samyagmithyadṛṣṭi* in relation to different *jivas* is the same as that of *tiryanch* beings. The minimum difference in relation to a single *jiva* is an infinitesimal fraction of a *palyopam* and a *muhurt*. The maximum difference is three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *asamyata samyagdṛṣṭi* in relation to different *jivas* is nonexistent. The minimum difference in relation to a single *jiva* is less than a *muhurt*. The maximum difference is three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is less than three *palyopamas* plus the difference of a previous *koṭi*. The difference in *samyata samyagdṛṣṭi* is

Page #170:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**50]**

**Sarvarthasiddhi:**

[1188 111] There is no difference between the *naana jeevas* (various living beings) in terms of *prthaktva* (individuality) for *samyata* (restrained), *asamyaata* (unrestrained), *pramatta* (distracted), and *apramatta* (undistracted).  For a single *jeeva* (living being), the *jghanya* (inferior) difference is *antarmuhoorta* (less than a moment), and the *utkarsha* (superior) difference is *purvakoti prthaktva* (a billion times the previous individuality).  For the four *upashamaka* (pacifiers), the difference is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is *purvakoti prthaktva*. The difference for the remaining *gunasthana* (stages of spiritual progress) is similar to that of *naana jeevas*.

[112] In *devagati* (the state of being a god), there is no difference between *mithyadrishti* (false belief) and *asamyaatsamyagdristi* (unrestrained right belief) in comparison to *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is less than thirty-one *sagaropama* (ocean-sized) *desha* (regions).  The difference between *saasadan* (enjoyment) *samyagdristi* (right belief) and *samyagmithyadrishti* (right-false belief) is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is a fraction of a *palyopama* (a measure of time) and *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is less than thirty-one *sagaropama* *desha*.

[113] In terms of *indriyanuvaada* (the path of the senses), there is no difference between *ekendriya* (one-sensed beings) and *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *kshudrabhavgrahana* (the perception of a small object), and the *utkarsha* difference is more than two thousand *sagaropama* *purvakoti prthaktva*. There is no difference between *vikaleindriya* (disabled-sensed beings) and *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *kshudrabhavgrahana*, and the *utkarsha* difference is *ananta kaala* (infinite time) with countless *pudgalparivarta* (changes in matter). Thus, the difference in terms of *indriya* is explained.  In terms of *guna* (qualities), there is no difference in both *naana jeevas* and a single *jeeva*.  The difference between *mithyadrishti* in *panchendriya* (five-sensed beings) is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. The difference between *saasadan* *samyagdristi* and *samyagmithyadrishti* is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is a fraction of a *palyopama* and *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is a thousand *sagaropama*.

[8112] In *devagati*, there is no difference between *mithyadrishti* and *asamyaatsamyagdristi* in comparison to *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is slightly less than thirty-one *sagaropama*. The difference between *saasadan* *samyagdristi* and *samyagmithyadrishti* is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is a fraction of a *palyopama* and *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is slightly less than thirty-one *sagaropama*.

[6113] In terms of *indriyanuvaada*, there is no difference between *ekendriya* and *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *kshudrabhavgrahana*, and the *utkarsha* difference is more than two thousand *sagaropama* *purvakoti prthaktva*. There is no difference between *vikaleindriya* and *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is *kshudrabhavgrahana*, and the *utkarsha* difference is *ananta kaala* with countless *pudgalparivarta*. Thus, the difference in terms of *indriya* is explained.  In terms of *guna*, there is no difference in both *naana jeevas* and a single *jeeva*.  The difference between *mithyadrishti* in *panchendriya* is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. The difference between *saasadan* *samyagdristi* and *samyagmithyadrishti* is similar to that of *naana jeevas*. For a single *jeeva*, the *jghanya* difference is a fraction of a *palyopama* and *antarmuhoorta*, and the *utkarsha* difference is a thousand *sagaropama*.

1. In *bhogabhoomi* (the realm of enjoyment), *samyama* (restraint) and *asamyama* (unrestraint) or the attainment of *samyama* is not possible, therefore this difference is only within forty-nine *parvakoti* (a billion times a billion).
2. In *deva* (gods), *gunasthana* (stages of spiritual progress) can change up to the ninth *graiveya* (a type of god). This is why the *utkarsha* difference between *mithyatva* (false belief) and *samyaktva* (right belief) is slightly less than thirty-one *sagaropama*.
3. The *utkarsha* difference for staying in *tras* (a type of *paryaya* (cycle of existence)) is more than two

Page #171:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**51.** The difference between the *purvakotiprithaktva* of the *asamyatasamyagdristi* and the *apramattasamyata* is greater than the difference between them and other living beings. The difference between them and a single living being is at least an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than a thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. The difference between the four *upasamaka* and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than a thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. The difference between the rest is the same.

**114.** The difference between the *prithvi*, *jala*, *agni*, and *vayu* bodied beings and other living beings is the same due to the *kayanuvaada*. The difference between them and a single living being is at least a *kshudrabhavgrahan* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is an infinite time, which is equal to countless *pudgalparivarta*. The difference between the *vanaspatikaayika* and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least a *kshudrabhavgrahan* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is countless *loka*. Thus, the difference in terms of *kaaya* is explained. In terms of *guna*, there is no difference between them and other living beings or a single living being. The difference between the *trasakaayika* and the *mithyadristi* is the same. The difference between the *sasadan* *samyagdristi*, *samyam* *mithyadristi*, and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least a countless part of a *palyopama* and an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than two thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. The difference between the *asamyatasamyagdristi* and the *apramattasamyata* is greater than the difference between them and other living beings. The difference between them and a single living being is at least an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than two thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. The difference between the four *upasamaka* and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than a thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. The difference between the rest is the same.

**8114.** Due to the *kayanuvaada*, the difference between the *prithvi*, *jala*, *agni*, and *vayu* bodied beings and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least a *kshudrabhavgrahan* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is an infinite time, which is equal to countless *pudgalparivarta*. The difference between the *vanaspatikaayika* and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least a *kshudrabhavgrahan* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is countless *loka*. Thus, the difference in terms of *kaaya* is explained. When considering the *gunasthan*, there is no difference between them and other living beings or a single living being. This means there is no difference between them in terms of both the highest and lowest levels. The difference between the *trasakaayika* and the *mithyadristi* is the same. The difference between the *sasadan* *samyagdristi*, *samyam* *mithyadristi*, and other living beings is the same. The difference between them and a single living being is at least a countless part of a *palyopama* and an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than two thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. The difference between the *asamyatasamyagdristi* and the *apramattasamyata* is greater than the difference between them and other living beings. The difference between them and a single living being is at least an *antarmuhurt* at the lowest level and at the highest level, it is greater than two thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*. 

**Note:** The text mentions adjustments to the highest level difference for various *gunasthan*. These adjustments are:

* **Sasaadana:** Subtract a countless part of an *avali* and nine *antarmuhurt* from a thousand *sagaropama* *purvakotiprithaktva*.
* **Misra:** Subtract twelve *antarmuhurt*.
* **Asamyata Samyagdristi:** Subtract ten *antarmuhurt*.
* **Samyata Samyata:** Subtract three *paksha*, three *dina*, and twelve *antarmuhurt*.
* **Pramatta Samyata and Aprammatta Samyata:** Subtract eight years and ten *antarmuhurt*.
* **Apuurvakarana, etc. (four upasamaka):** Add 30, 28, 26, and 24 *antarmuhurt* respectively and subtract eight years.

Page #172:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

[1188114 Compared to many beings, it is the same. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is more than two thousand sagaropamas multiplied by a hundred koti. For the rest, it is like the five senses.
8115. According to the Yoga Anuvāda, there is no difference between the Kayayogi, Vachanayogi, and Manoyogi, Mithyadṛṣṭi, Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi, Samyatasamyata, Pramattasamyata, Apramattasamyata, and Sayogakevali, compared to many beings and one being. For Sasadan Samyagdṛṣṭi and Samyagmithyadṛṣṭi, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, there is no difference. For the four Upashamakas, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, there is no difference. For the four Kshapakas and the Ayogakevali, it is the same.
8116. According to the Veda Anuvāda, for the Strivedis, there is no difference for Mithyadṛṣṭi compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is less than fifty-five palyopamas. For Sasadan Samyagdṛṣṭi and Samyagmithyadṛṣṭi, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an uncountable part of a palyopama and an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is a hundred palyopamas. For Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi to Apramattasamyata, there is no difference compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is a hundred palyopamas. For the two Upashamakas, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is a hundred palyopamas. For the two Kshapakas, the least is one time compared to many beings. For the highest, it is a year. For one being, the highest difference is more than two thousand sagaropamas multiplied by a hundred koti. The difference between the four Upashamakas is the same as that of many beings. For one being, the least difference is an antarmūhūrta and the highest difference is more than two thousand sagaropamas multiplied by a hundred koti. The difference between the remaining Gunasthānas is the same as that of the five senses.
8115. According to the Yoga Anuvāda, there is no difference between the Kayayogi, Vachanayogi, and Manoyogi, Mithyadṛṣṭi, Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi, Samyatasamyata, Pramattasamyata, Apramattasamyata, and Sayogakevali, compared to many beings and one being. For Sasadan Samyagdṛṣṭi and Samyagmithyadṛṣṭi, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, there is no difference. For the four Upashamakas, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, there is no difference. For the four Kshapakas and the Ayogakevali, it is the same.
8116. According to the Veda Anuvāda, for the Strivedis, there is no difference for Mithyadṛṣṭi compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is less than fifty-five palyopamas. For Sasadan Samyagdṛṣṭi and Samyagmithyadṛṣṭi, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an uncountable part of a palyopama and an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is a hundred palyopamas. For Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭi to Apramattasamyata, there is no difference compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is a hundred palyopamas. For the two Upashamakas, it is the same compared to many beings. For one being, the least is an antarmūhūrta. For the highest, it is a hundred palyopamas. For the two Kshapakas, the least is one time compared to many beings. For the highest, it is a year.
1. Five antarmūhūrtas less than fifty-five palyas. 2. The highest time for Strivedis is a hundred palyopamas. Subtracting two times from it, we get the difference for Sasadan Samyagdṛṣṭi in Strivedis. Subtracting six antarmūhūrtas from it, we get the highest difference for Samyagmithyadṛṣṭi. Further, we should calculate the Agamānāsāra in the same way. ]

Page #173:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**117.** In the case of men, the difference between Mithyadrishti and the others is like an ocean. The difference between Saasadan Samyagdristi and Samyagmithyadrishti, in relation to different beings, is like an ocean. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an immeasurable part of a Palya and an Antarmuhurt respectively. The difference between the highest and the lowest is like a hundred oceans. In the case of Asanyata Samyagdristi and the others, there is no difference in relation to different beings. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt and a hundred oceans respectively. The difference between the two Upshamaks, in relation to different beings, is like an ocean. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt and a hundred oceans respectively. The difference between the two Kshapaks, in relation to different beings, is like one moment for the lowest and a year plus one for the highest. There is no difference in relation to a single being.

**118.** In the case of Napumsakavedis, there is no difference between Mithyadrishti and the others in relation to different beings. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt and thirty-three oceans minus a few countries respectively. The difference between Saasadan Samyagdristi and the others, up to the Nivritti Upshamak, is the same as stated above. The difference between the two Kshapaks is the same as in the case of Strivedis. In the case of Apagatavedis, the difference between the Nivrittibadar Upshamak and the Saksham Samparaya Upshamak, in relation to different beings, is the same as stated above. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt. The difference between the Upshantakashaya and the others, in relation to different beings, is like an ocean. There is no difference in relation to a single being. The difference between the rest is like an ocean.

**119.** Due to the influence of Kshaya, the difference between the highest and the lowest in the case of Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha, from Mithyadrishti to the Nivritti Upshamak, is like a year. There is no difference in relation to a single being.

**117.** In the case of Purushavedis, the difference between Mithyadrishti and the others is like an ocean. The difference between Saasadan Samyagdristi and Samyagmithyadrishti, in relation to different beings, is like an ocean. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an immeasurable part of a Palya and an Antarmuhurt respectively. The difference between the highest and the lowest is like a hundred oceans. In the case of Asanyata Samyagdristi and the others, there is no difference in relation to different beings. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt and a hundred oceans respectively. The difference between the two Upshamaks, in relation to different beings, is like an ocean. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt and a hundred oceans respectively. The difference between the two Kshapaks, in relation to different beings, is like one moment for the lowest and a year plus one for the highest. There is no difference in relation to a single being.

**118.** In the case of Napumsakavedis, there is no difference between Mithyadrishti and the others in relation to different beings. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt and thirty-three oceans minus a few countries respectively. The difference between Saasadan Samyagdristi and the others, up to the Nivritti Upshamak, is the same as stated above. The difference between the two Kshapaks is the same as in the case of Strivedis. In the case of Apagatavedis, the difference between the Nivrittibadar Upshamak and the Saksham Samparaya Upshamak, in relation to different beings, is the same as stated above. In relation to a single being, the difference between the lowest and the highest is like an Antarmuhurt. The difference between the Upshantakashaya and the others, in relation to different beings, is like an ocean. There is no difference in relation to a single being. The difference between the rest is like an ocean.

**119.** Due to the influence of Kshaya, the difference between the highest and the lowest in the case of Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha, from Mithyadrishti to the Nivritti Upshamak, is like a year. There is no difference in relation to a single being.

**Notes:**

* **Palya:** A unit of time, equivalent to 1/16th of an Antarmuhurt.
* **Antarmuhurt:** A unit of time, equivalent to 1/30th of a Muhurt.
* **Muhurt:** A unit of time, equivalent to 48 minutes.
* **Upshamak:** A stage in the Jain path of liberation, where the negative karmas are gradually subdued.
* **Kshapak:** A stage in the Jain path of liberation, where the negative karmas are completely destroyed.
* **Mithyadrishti:** A state of wrong belief, one of the four main types of wrong belief in Jainism.
* **Saasadan Samyagdristi:** A state of right belief, where one has attained the knowledge of the true nature of reality.
* **Samyagmithyadrishti:** A state of mixed belief, where one has some right belief and some wrong belief.
* **Asanyata Samyagdristi:** A state of right belief, where one has attained the knowledge of the true nature of reality and has also overcome the negative karmas.
* **Nivritti Upshamak:** A stage in the Jain path of liberation, where the negative karmas are completely subdued.
* **Saksham Samparaya Upshamak:** A stage in the Jain path of liberation, where the negative karmas are completely subdued and one is capable of attaining liberation.
* **Upshantakashaya:** A state of mind where the negative karmas are completely subdued and one is free from all attachments.
* **Krodha:** Anger
* **Mana:** Pride
* **Maya:** Deceit
* **Lobha:** Greed
* **Purushavedi:** A male Jain who has attained the highest stage of liberation.
* **Napums

Page #174:
---------------------------
54] Sarvarthasiddhi
-1188 119] The difference in the duration of the *mano-yoga* for each *guna-sthana* is the same as for *mano-yogis*. For both *kshapikas*, the difference is negligible compared to many beings, with a minimum of one *samaya* and a maximum of one year plus. For *kevala-lobha*, the difference for the subtle *saamparaya* *upashamaka* is the same as for many beings. There is no difference for one being. For the *kshapika* with subtle *lobha*, the difference is the same as for many beings. For those without *kaaya*, the difference for the *upashaanta* *kashaya* is the same as for many beings. There is no difference for one being. For the remaining three *guna-sthana*, the difference is the same as for many beings.
120. In the *jnana* *margana* translation, for *matya-jnani*, *shruta-jnani*, and *vibhang-jnani*, the difference for *mithya-drishti* is negligible compared to many beings and one being. For *saasadan* *samyak-drishti*, the difference is the same as for many beings. There is no difference for one being. For *aabhini-bodhik-jnani*, *shruta-jnani*, and *avadhi-jnani*, the difference for *asanyata-samyak-drishti* is negligible compared to many beings. For one being, the minimum difference is one *antar-muhurta* and the maximum difference is one *purva-koti* less. For *sanyata-sanyata*, the difference is negligible compared to many beings. For one being, the minimum difference is one *antar-muhurta* and the maximum difference is sixty-six *sagaropama* plus. For *pramatta-sanyata* and *aprammatta-sanyata*, the difference is negligible compared to many beings. For one being, the minimum difference is one *antar-muhurta* and the maximum difference is thirty-three *sagaropama* plus. For the four *upashamakas*, the difference is the same as for many beings. For one being, the minimum difference is one *antar-muhurta* and the maximum difference is sixty-six *sagaropama* plus. For the four *kshapikas*, the difference is the same as for many beings. However, for *avadhi-jnani*, the minimum difference compared to many beings is one *samaya* and the maximum difference is one year plus.

Page #175:
---------------------------
There is no difference with respect to a single being. There is no difference between the *pramattasamyata* and *apramattasamyata* in *manahparyayajnanis* with respect to many beings. With respect to a single being, the difference between the inferior and superior is an *antarmuhurt*. The difference between the four *upashamakas* is like an *ogha* with respect to many beings. With respect to a single being, the difference between the inferior is an *antarmuhurt* and the difference between the superior is less than a *purvakoti*. The difference between the four *kshapikas* is like an *avadhijnani*. The difference between the two *kevalajnanis* is like an *ogha*.

121. There is no difference between the *pramattasamyata* and *apramattasamyata* in *samayikashuddhisamyata* and *chedopasthapanashuddhisamyata* with respect to many beings, according to the interpretation of the *samyama* path. With respect to a single being, the difference between the inferior and superior is an *antarmuhurt*. The difference between the two *upashamakas* is like an *ogha* with respect to many beings. With respect to a single being, the difference between the inferior is an *antarmuhurt* and the difference between the superior is less than a *purvakoti*. The difference between the two *kshapikas* is like an *ogha*. There is no difference between the *pramattasamyata* and *apramattasamyata* in *parihara shuddhisamyata* with respect to many beings. With respect to a single being, the difference between the inferior and superior is an *antarmuhurt*. The difference between the *upashamaka* in *sukshmasamparayashuddhisamyata* is like an *ogha* with respect to many beings. There is no difference with respect to a single being. The difference between the same *sukshmasamparay* *kshayaka* is like an *ogha*. As stated, the difference is like that of a *kashyayavata*. There is no difference between the *samyatasamyata* with respect to many beings and a single being. There is no difference between the *asamyatas* with respect to many beings, according to the *mithyadrishti*. With respect to a single being, the difference between the inferior is an *antarmuhurt* and the difference between the superior is less than thirty-three *sagaropama*. The difference between the remaining three *gunasthanas* is like an *ogha*.

Page #176:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**56] Sarvarthasiddhi**

[118 8 1228122. In terms of Darshan, the difference between Mithyadrishti and others in Chakshudarshini is like an ocean. The difference between Sasadan Samyagdristi and Samyagmithyadrishti in relation to different Jivas is like an ocean. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is a fraction of a Palya-upam and an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama. In relation to different Jivas, there is no difference between Asanyata Samyagdristi and the various Gunasthanas up to Apramatta Samyata. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama. In relation to different Jivas, the difference between the four Upshamaka is like an ocean. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama. The difference between the four Kshapaka is like an ocean. In relation to different Jivas, the difference between Mithyadrishti and the various Gunasthanas up to Kshina Kshaya in AChakshudarshini is like an ocean. The difference between Avadhi Darshani and Avadhi Gyanini is the same. The difference between Kevala Darshani and Kevala Gyanini is the same.

8123. In terms of Leshya, the difference between Mithyadrishti and Asanyata Samyagdristi in relation to different Jivas in Krishna, Neel and Kapota Leshya is not there. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than thirty-seven Sagaropama, slightly less than seventeen Sagaropama and slightly less than seven Sagaropama respectively. The difference between Sasadan Samyagdristi and Samyagmithyadrishti in relation to different Jivas is like an ocean. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is a fraction of a Palya-upam and an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than thirty-seven Sagaropama, slightly less than seventeen Sagaropama and slightly less than seven Sagaropama respectively.

8122. In terms of Darshan Margna, the difference between Mithyadrishti and others in Chakshudarshini is like an ocean. The difference between Sasadan Samyagdristi and Samyagmithyadrishti in relation to different Jivas is like an ocean. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is a fraction of a Palya-upam and an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama. In relation to different Jivas, there is no difference between Asanyata Samyagdristi and the various Gunasthanas up to Apramatta Samyata. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama. In relation to different Jivas, the difference between the four Upshamaka is like an ocean. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama. The difference between the four Kshapaka is like an ocean. In relation to different Jivas, the difference between Mithyadrishti and the various Gunasthanas up to Kshina Kshaya in AChakshudarshini is like an ocean. The difference between Avadhi Darshani and Avadhi Gyanini is the same. The difference between Kevala Darshani and Kevala Gyanini is the same.

8123. In terms of Leshya Margna, the difference between Mithyadrishti and Asanyata Samyagdristi in relation to different Jivas in Krishna, Neel and Kapota Leshya is not there. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than thirty-seven Sagaropama, slightly less than seventeen Sagaropama and slightly less than seven Sagaropama respectively. The difference between Sasadan Samyagdristi and Samyagmithyadrishti in relation to different Jivas is like an ocean. In relation to one Jiva, the least difference is a fraction of a Palya-upam and an Antarmuhurta, while the greatest difference is slightly less than thirty-seven Sagaropama, slightly less than seventeen Sagaropama and slightly less than seven Sagaropama respectively.

+Samanyavat. Ev-mu. 2. In Chakshudarshini, the difference between Sasadan and Samyagmithyadrishti is nine Antarmuhurta and a fraction of an Avaliya less, twelve Antarmuhurta and slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama more. 3. In Chakshudarshini, the difference between Aviraata Samyagdristi and Samyata Samyata is ten Antarmuhurta less, forty-eight days less, twelve Antarmuhurta less, eight years and ten Antarmuhurta less, eight years and ten Antarmuhurta less, and slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama more. 4. In Chakshudarshini, the difference between the four Upshamaka is twenty-nine, twenty-seven, twenty-five and twenty-three Antarmuhurta respectively, and eight years less, and slightly less than two thousand Sagaropama more.

Page #177:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**[1188-126]**

**[57 $ 124.** There is no difference between the *mithyadrishti* and the *asanyata samyagdristi* in the *pita* and *padma* *leshyas* with respect to many beings. With respect to one being, the least difference is an *antarmuhurt* and the greatest difference is two *sagaropama* plus one in both *leshyas*. There is no difference between the *sasadan samyagdristi* and the *samyagmithyadristi* with respect to many beings, it is like an *ogh*. With respect to one being, the least difference is an *antarmuhurt* and an innumerable part of a *palyopama* in both *gunasthana*, and the greatest difference is two *sagaropama* plus one in both *leshyas*. There is no difference between the *sanyata*, *asanyata*, *pramatta*, *pramattasanyata* and *apramattasanyata* with respect to many beings and one being.

**$ 125.** There is no difference between the *mithyadrishti* and the *asanyata samyagdristi* in the *shukla* *leshyas* with respect to many beings. With respect to one being, the least difference is an *antarmuhurt* and the greatest difference is thirty *sagaropama* minus one. There is no difference between the *sasadan samyagdristi* and the *samyagmithyadristi* with respect to many beings, it is like an *ogh*. With respect to one being, the least difference is an *antarmuhurt* and an innumerable part of a *palyopama*, and the greatest difference is thirty *sagaropama* minus one. The difference between the *sanyata*, *asanyata* and *pramattasanyata* is like the *tejoleshya*. There is no difference between the *apramattasanyata* with respect to many beings. With respect to one being, the least and greatest difference is an *antarmuhurt*. The difference between the three *upashamaka* with respect to many beings is like an *ogh*. With respect to one being, the least and greatest difference is an *antarmuhurt*. The difference between the *upashanta kshaya* with respect to many beings is like an *ogh*. With respect to one being, there is no difference. The difference between the four *kshapka*, *sayogakevali* and *leshyarahita* is like an *ogh*.

**$ 126.** The difference between the *mithyadrishti* to the *ayogakevali* in the *bhavyas* is like an *ogh* according to the *bhavyanuvada*. The difference between the *abhavya*...

Page #178:
---------------------------
## 58]
In the attainment of all auspiciousness, there is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life.
$ 127. In the case of the *Samyaktvānuvāve* (the path of right conduct), there is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Kṣāyika Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision but is still subject to the cycle of birth and death) and the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision and is free from the cycle of birth and death). For the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* (a period of 48 minutes) at the lowest level and a *pūrva-koṭi* (a period of 100,000 years) at the highest level. There is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Samyata*, *Samyata*, *Pramatta* (the one who is careless) and *Pramatta* (the one who is careless) *Samyakdṛṣṭi*. For the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and thirty-three *sāgara-upamā* (a period of 100,000 years) at the highest level. For the four *Upasamaka* (the ones who have attained the right vision and are free from the cycle of birth and death), the difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life is negligible. For the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and thirty-three *sāgara-upamā* at the highest level. For the rest, the difference is negligible.
$ 128. In the case of the *Kṣāyopaśamika Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision and is free from the cycle of birth and death), there is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Asamyata Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision but is still subject to the cycle of birth and death). For the *Asamyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and a *pūrva-koṭi* at the highest level. There is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Samyata* and *Samyata* *Samyakdṛṣṭi*. For the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and sixty-six *sāgara-upamā* at the highest level. There is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Pramatta* and *Pramatta* *Samyakdṛṣṭi*. For the *Pramatta Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and thirty-three *sāgara-upamā* at the highest level.
$ 129. In the case of the *Paśamika Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision and is free from the cycle of birth and death), there is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Asamyata Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision but is still subject to the cycle of birth and death). For the *Asamyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and seven days and nights at the highest level. For the *Samyata* and *Samyata* *Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life is negligible. For the *Abhavya* (the one who is destined for hell), there is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life.
$ 127. In the *Samyaktvamārgaṇā* (the path of right conduct), there is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Kṣāyika Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision but is still subject to the cycle of birth and death) and the *Asamyata Samyakdṛṣṭi* (the one who has attained the right vision but is still subject to the cycle of birth and death). For the *Asamyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and a *pūrva-koṭi* at the highest level. There is no difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life for the *Samyata*, *Samyata*, *Pramatta* (the one who is careless) and *Pramatta* (the one who is careless) *Samyakdṛṣṭi*. For the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and thirty-three *sāgara-upamā* at the highest level. For the four *Upasamaka* (the ones who have attained the right vision and are free from the cycle of birth and death), the difference between the consideration of many lives and the consideration of one life is negligible. For the *Samyata Samyakdṛṣṭi*, the difference between the consideration of one life and many lives is negligible, being only a fraction of a *muhūrta* at the lowest level and thirty-three *sāgara-upamā* at the highest level. For the rest, the difference is negligible.
[ 1188126 -
$ 128. In the case of the *Kṣ

Page #179:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**-118 $ 130]**

**Time difference between a single being and multiple beings:**

* **For the restrained and unrestrained:** The minimum time difference is one moment, and the maximum is fourteen days and nights. For a single being, the minimum and maximum difference is an antarmuhurta.
* **For the restrained and unrestrained:** The minimum time difference is one moment, and the maximum is fifteen days and nights. For a single being, the minimum and maximum difference is an antarmuhurta.
* **For the three types of upashamaka:** The minimum time difference is one moment, and the maximum is a year. For a single being, the minimum and maximum difference is an antarmuhurta.
* **For the upashanta kshaya:** The time difference is the same as for multiple beings. For a single being, there is no difference.
* **For the sasadan samyagdristi and samyagmithyadristi:** The minimum time difference is one moment, and the maximum is an uncountable fraction of a palya. For a single being, there is no difference.
* **For the mithyadristi:** There is no difference between a single being and multiple beings.

**Time difference based on knowledge:**

* **For the mithyadristi:** The time difference is the same as for multiple beings.
* **For the sasadan samyagdristi and samyagmithyadristi:** The time difference is the same as for multiple beings. For a single being, the minimum difference is an uncountable fraction of a palya, and the maximum is an antarmuhurta. The maximum difference is a hundred times the size of an ocean.
* **For the unrestrained samyagdristi to the unrestrained restrained:** There is no difference between a single being and multiple beings. For a single being, the minimum difference is an antarmuhurta, and the maximum is a hundred times the size of an ocean.
* **For the four types of upashamaka:** The time difference is the same as for multiple beings. For a single being, the minimum difference is an antarmuhurta, and the maximum is a hundred times the size of an ocean.
* **For the four types of kshapaka:** The time difference is the same as for multiple beings.
* **For the asanjna:** There is no difference between a single being and multiple beings.
* **For those without any of the above classifications:** The time difference is the same as for multiple beings.

**Explanation:**

The time difference between a single being and multiple beings is significant. This is because the restrained and unrestrained have a different experience of time than those who are not restrained. The time difference is also affected by the type of knowledge that a being has. For example, the mithyadristi has a different experience of time than the samyagdristi.

**Note:** The terms "antarmuhurta" and "palya" are units of time in Jainism.

Page #180:
---------------------------
##  **Sarvarthasiddhi**
[118 § 131
8.131. The difference in *mithyadrishti* for those who consume food is similar to the difference in the *ogha* (flow of karma). The difference in *sāsādanasamyakdrishti* and *samyakmithyadrishti* in relation to many beings is similar to the difference in the *ogha*. In relation to one being, the least difference is a fraction of a *palyopamā* (a measure of time) and an *antarmuhūrta* (a moment), while the greatest difference is a fraction of an *angula* (finger) which is *asanख्येया* (innumerable) in number, the measure of which is *asanख्येया* *asanख्येया* *utsarpini* and *avasarpini* (ascending and descending cycles of time). From *asanayatasamyakdrishti* to *aprammatta* *samyata* (the stages of spiritual progress), there is no difference in relation to many beings. In relation to one being, the least difference is an *antarmuhūrta* and the greatest difference is a fraction of an *angula* which is *asanख्येया* in number, the measure of which is *asanख्येया* *asanख्येया* *utsarpini* and *avasarpini*. The difference in the four *upasamaka* (stages of spiritual progress) in relation to many beings is similar to the difference in the *ogha*. In relation to one being, the least difference is an *antarmuhūrta* and the greatest difference is a fraction of an *angula* which is *asanख्येया* in number, the measure of which is *asanख्येया* *asanख्येया* *utsarpini* and *avasarpini*. The difference in the four *kshapika* (stages of spiritual progress) and the *sayogakevali* (liberated beings) is similar to the difference in the *ogha*.
60]
$ 132. In those who do not consume food, there is no difference in *mithyadrishti* in relation to many beings and one being. The difference in *sāsādanasamyakdrishti* in relation to many beings is a minimum of one *samaya* (a measure of time) and a maximum of a fraction of a *palyopamā*. There is no difference in relation to one being. The difference in *asanayatasamyakdrishti* in relation to many beings is a minimum of one *samaya* and a maximum of a *māsapṛthaktva* (a month). There is no difference in relation to one being. The difference in *sayogakevali* in relation to many beings is a minimum of one *samaya* and a maximum of a *varshaprthaktva* (a year). There is no difference in relation to one being. The difference in *ayogakevali* in relation to many beings is a minimum of one *bhrama* (a rotation of the earth) and a maximum of six months. There is no difference in relation to one being. This is how the difference is considered.
9 133. Now we consider *bhāva* (state of being). It is of two types: general and specific.
.
1. -bhaga asanख्येया uts - mu. 12. bhava: uktam ca micche khalu odaio vidie pun parinamio bhava. misse samiko aviradasammammi tipleva ||1|| asan - mu.

Page #181:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1:

**Mithyadrishti** is an **audayika** state. **Sāsādanasamyakdrishti** is a **pāriṇāmika** state. **Samyagmithyadrishti** is a **kṣayopashamika** state. **Asamyatasamyagdrishti** is an **aupashamika**, **kṣayika**, or **kṣayopashamika** state. However, **asamyata** in this case is due to an **audayika** state. **Samyatāsamyata**, **pramattasamyata**, and **apramattasamyata** are **kṣayopashamika** states. The four **upashamikas** are **aupashamika** states. The four **kṣapakas**, **sayogakevali**, and **ayogakevali** are **kṣayika** states.

## 134:

Specifically, in terms of **gati** (motion), in the **narakagati** (hell realm), on the first **prithvi** (earth), the **narakas** (hell beings) from **mithyadrishti** to **asamyatasamyagdrishti** have the same **ogha** (flow) as the general population. From the second to the seventh **prithvi**, **mithyadrishti**, **sāsādanasamyakdrishti**, and **samyagmithyadrishti** have the same **ogha** as the general population. **Asamyatasamyagdrishti** is an **aupashamika** or **kṣayopashamika** state. However, **asamyata** in this case is due to an **audayika** state. In the **tiryanchgati** (animal realm), the **tiryanch** (animals) from **mithyadrishti** to **samyatāsamyata** have the same **ogha** as the general population. In the **manushygati** (human realm), the **manushyas** (humans) from **mithyadrishti** to **ayogakevali** have the same **ogha** as the general population. In the **devagati** (heavenly realm), the **devas** (gods) from **mithyadrishti** to **asamyatasamyagdrishti** have the same **ogha** as the general population.

## 135:

In terms of **indriya** (sense organs), **ekendriya** (one-sense) and **vikaleindriya** (disabled sense) beings are **audayika** states. In **panchendriya** (five-sense) beings, from **mithyadrishti** to **ayogakevali**, each **gunasthan** (stage of spiritual development) has the same **ogha** as the general population.

## 136:

In terms of **kaya** (body), **sthāvarakāyika** (stationary body) beings are **audayika** states. **Trasakāyika** (mobile body) beings have the same **ogha** as the general population.

## 137:

In terms of **yoga** (union), **kāyayogi** (body-focused), **vachanayogi** (speech-focused), and **manoyogi** (mind-focused) beings, from **mithyadrishti** to **sayogakevali**, have the same **ogha** as the general population. 

**Note:** The text also includes a brief explanation of the **pāriṇāmika** and **kṣayopashamika** states of **sāsādanasamyakdrishti** and **samyagmithyadrishti**, respectively.

Page #182:
---------------------------
##  621
**Sarvartha Siddhi**

[1188136] **General:**

8138. **Vedānuvāde** (Translation of Veda):  The same for all beings who are Vedī (possess Veda), including those who are Strī Vedī (female Vedī), Puruṣa Vedī (male Vedī), Napumsaka Vedī (neuter Vedī), and those who are devoid of Veda.

8139. **Kapāyānuvāde** (Translation of Kṣayā): The same for all beings who have Kṣayā (passions), including those who have Krodha Kṣayā (anger), Māna Kṣayā (pride), Māyā Kṣayā (deceit), and Lobha Kṣayā (greed), and those who are devoid of Kṣayā.

8140. **Jñānānuvāde** (Translation of Knowledge): The same for all beings who have Jñāna (knowledge), including those who have Mati Jñāna (knowledge of the mind), Śruta Jñāna (knowledge from scriptures), Avadi Jñāna (knowledge of perception), Manaḥparyaya Jñāna (knowledge of the mind's activities), and Kevala Jñāna (perfect knowledge).

8141. **Samyanānuvāde** (Translation of Restraint): The same for all beings who are Samyata (restrained), including those who are Samyata-Samyata (restrained and restrained), and those who are Asamyata (unrestrained).

8142. **Darśanānuvāde** (Translation of Vision): The same for all beings who have Darśana (vision), including those who have Cakṣu Darśana (eye vision), Acākṣu Darśana (non-eye vision), Avadi Darśana (perception vision), and Kevala Darśana (perfect vision).

8143. **Leśyānuvāde** (Translation of Leśyā): The same for all beings who have Leśyā (subtle karmic tendencies), including those who have Ṣaḍ Leśyā (six Leśyā), and those who are devoid of Leśyā.

8144. **Bhavyaanuvaade** (Translation of Bhavya): The same for all beings who are Bhavya (destined for liberation), from Mithyādrṣṭi (wrong belief) to Ayogakevali (liberated without effort). For Abhavya (not destined for liberation), there are only Pariṇāmik (consequential) states.

8145. **Samyaktvanuvaade** (Translation of Right Faith): For beings with Kṣayika Samyagdṛṣṭi (right faith with karmic tendencies), the state of Asamyata Samyagdṛṣṭi (unrestrained right faith) is Kṣayika (with karmic tendencies). This is Kṣayika Samyaktva. However, Asamyatva (unrestrained state) is Audayika (with karmic potential). For beings who are Samyata-Samyata (restrained and restrained), Pramatta-Samyata (restrained with negligence), and Apramatta-Samyata (restrained without negligence), the state is Kṣayopasamik (with karmic tendencies diminishing). This is Kṣayika Samyaktva. For the four Upasamaka (subduers of passions), the state is Aupaśamik (with karmic tendencies diminishing). This is Kṣayika Samyaktva. For the remaining Gunasthāna (stages of spiritual progress), the state is the same as the general state. For beings with Kṣayopasamik Samyagdṛṣṭi (right faith with diminishing karmic tendencies), the state of Asamyata Samyagdṛṣṭi (unrestrained right faith) is Kṣayopasamik (with diminishing karmic tendencies). The state of Kṣayopasamik Dṛṣṭi (right faith with diminishing karmic tendencies) is the same as the state of beings from Sayogakevali (liberated with effort) to Ayogakevali (liberated without effort).

38. **Vedānuvāde** (Translation of Veda): The same for all beings who are Vedī (possess Veda), including those who are Strī Vedī (female Vedī), Puruṣa Vedī (male Vedī), Napumsaka Vedī (neuter Vedī), and those who are devoid of Veda.

8139. **Kapāyānuvāde** (Translation of Kṣayā): The same for all beings who have Kṣayā (passions), including those who have Krodha Kṣayā (anger), Māna Kṣayā (pride), Māyā Kṣayā (deceit), and Lobha Kṣayā (greed), and those who are devoid of Kṣayā.

8140. **Jñānānuvāde** (Translation of Knowledge): The same for all beings who have Jñāna (knowledge), including those who have Mati Jñāna (knowledge of the mind), Śruta Jñāna (knowledge from scriptures), Avadi Jñāna (knowledge of perception), Manaḥparyaya Jñāna (knowledge of the mind's activities), and Kevala Jñāna (perfect knowledge).

8141. **Samyanānuvāde** (Translation of Restraint): The same for all beings who are Samyata (restrained), including those who are Samyata-Samyata (restrained and restrained), and those who are Asamyata (unrestrained).

8142. **Darśanānuvāde** (Translation of Vision): The same for all beings who have Darśana (vision), including those who have Cakṣu Darśana (eye vision), Acākṣu Darśana (non-eye vision), Avadi Darśana (perception vision), and Kevala Darśana (perfect vision).

8143. **Leśyānuvāde** (Translation of Leśyā): The same for all beings who have Leśyā (subtle karmic tendencies), including those who have Ṣaḍ Leśyā (six Leśyā), and those who are devoid of Leśyā.

8144. **Bhavyaanuvaade** (Translation of Bhavya): The same for all beings who are Bhavya (destined for liberation), from Mithyādrṣṭi (wrong belief) to Ayogakevali (liberated without effort). For Abhavya (not destined for liberation), there are only Pariṇāmik (consequential) states.

8145. **Samyaktvanuvaade** (Translation of Right Faith): For beings with Kṣayika Samyagdṛṣ

Page #183:
---------------------------
## Chapter One

**1188148**  Samyaktvam (Right Faith) is characterized by the cessation of kshaya (karmic defilement).  However, for the asamyata (non-controlled), it is an audayika (arising) state. For the samyata-samyata (controlled-controlled), pramatta-samyata (careless-controlled), and aprammatta-samyata (careful-controlled), it is a kshayopaśamika (cessation of kshaya) state. This kshayopaśamika state is Samyaktvam.

Among the aupaśamika (subdued) samyagdrsti (right vision), the asamyata samyagdrsti is an aupaśamika state. This aupaśamika state is Samyaktvam.  However, for the asamyata, it is an audayika state. For the samyata-samyata, pramatta-samyata, and aprammatta-samyata, it is a kshayopaśamika state. This aupaśamika state is Samyaktvam.  The aupaśamika state of the four upasamaka (subduers) is Samyaktvam.  The parināmika (consequential) state of the sasadan samyagdrsti (right vision with attachment) is Samyaktvam.  The kshayopaśamika state of the samyag-mithyadrsti (right-wrong vision) is Samyaktvam.  The audayika state of the mithyadrsti (wrong vision) is Samyaktvam.

**8146.**  The state of the sanjna (conscious) is similar to the flow of the sanjna. The state of the asanjna (unconscious) is audayika. The state of those who are devoid of both sanjna and asanjna is similar to the flow of both.

**8147.**  The state of the aharaka (eating) and anaharaka (non-eating) is similar to the flow of the aharaka. Thus, the state is complete.

**8148.**  Now, we discuss the alpa-bahutvam (few-many). It is of two types: samanya (general) and visesha (specific).  Generally, the three upasamaka are the fewest, equal in number to the number of entrances into their respective gunasthanas (states of merit) and kalas (times).  The upashanta-kshaya (those with subdued karmic defilement) are equal in number.  The kshapaka (destroyers) of the three gunasthanas, starting with apurvakarana (initial karma), are numerous.  The kshina-kshaya-vitraga (those with destroyed karmic defilement, free from attachment) are equal in number.  The sayoga-kevali (liberated with attachments) and ayoga-kevali (liberated without attachments) are equal in number to the number of entrances.  The sayoga-kevali, who are numerous, are gathered in their own time.  The aprammatta-samyata (careful-controlled) are numerous.  The pramatta-samyata (careless-controlled) are numerous.  The samyata-samyata (controlled-controlled) are innumerable.  The sasadan-samyagdrsti (right vision with attachment) are innumerable.  The samyag-mithyadrsti (right-wrong vision) are numerous.  The asamyata-samyagdrsti (non-controlled right vision) are innumerable.  The mithyadrsti (wrong vision) are infinite.

Page #184:
---------------------------
[64] In terms of the path of motion (gatyānuvāda), in hell, in all the earths, in all the hells, the number of Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭis is the least. From them, the number of Samyakmithyādṛṣṭis is countable. From them, the number of Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭis is uncountable. From them, the number of Mithyādṛṣṭis is uncountable. In the path of the animals (tiryanch), in all the animals, the number of Samyatāsamyatas is the least. The rest of the animals, with their different qualities, are like the ocean. In the path of humans (manushya), the number of humans from the Upasamakas to the Pramattasamyaṭas is like the ocean. From the Pramattasamyaṭas, the number of Samyatāsamyatas is countable. From them, the number of Sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭis is countable. From them, the number of Samyakmithyādṛṣṭis is countable. From them, the number of Asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭis is countable. From them, the number of Mithyādṛṣṭis is uncountable. In the path of the gods (deva), the number of gods is like the number of hell beings.
[150] In terms of the path of the senses (indriyānuvāda), there is no difference in the number of qualities (guṇasthāna) between those with one sense and those with a deficient sense, hence there is no difference in their number. The number of those with five senses is like the ocean. But there is this difference: the number of Mithyādṛṣṭis is uncountable.
[151] In terms of the path of the body (kāyānuvāda), there is no difference in the number of qualities (guṇasthāna) between the stationary-bodied beings, hence there is no difference in their number. The number of those with three bodies is like the number of those with five senses.
[152] In terms of the path of yoga (yogānuvāda), the number of those with speech-yoga and mind-yoga is like the number of those with five senses. The number of those with body-yoga is like the ocean. In terms of the path of knowledge (vedānuvāda), the number of those with female knowledge and male knowledge is like the number of those with five senses. The number of those with neuter knowledge and those without knowledge is like the ocean.
[153] In terms of the path of passions (kaṣāyānuvāda), the number of those with anger-passion, pride-passion, and deceit-passion is like the number of those with male knowledge. But there is this difference: the number of Mithyādṛṣṭis is infinite. The number of those with greed-passion is equal to the number of the two Upasamakas. From them, the number of Kṣapakas is countable. From them, the number of those with subtle-subtle-purification-Upasamaka-Samyata is much greater. From them, 1. The sense (indriya) is meant. From the five senses, there are many more senses, up to the end of the senses. (Pancha-mu.) 2. The action (kārya) is meant. The number of those with a body of light (tejas-kāya) is the least. From them, the number of those with an earth-body (pṛthivī-kāya) is greater. From them, the number of those with an ap-kāya is less. From them, the number of those with a vāta-kāya is greater. From them, the number of plants (vanaspati) is infinite. (Sa mu.)

Page #185:
---------------------------
The English translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:

The first chapter discusses the special qualities of the Samyata (restrained) and Asanyata (unrestrained) beings. The subtle Samparaya (future life) Kshapakas (destroyers of karmas) have enumerable qualities. The rest are like the general case.

154. By the translation of Jnana (knowledge), in the Matijnani (possessors of sensory knowledge) and Shrutajnanis (possessors of scriptural knowledge), the Sasadana Samyagdrishti (partially right faith) are the least in number. The Mithyadrishti (wrong faith) are infinite in number. In the Vibhangajnanis (possessors of analytical knowledge), the Sasadana Samyagdrishti are the least in number. The Mithyadrishti are innumerable in number. In the Matijnani, Shrutajnani and Avadhijnani, the four Upashamaka (subsiders of karmas) and the four Kshapakas are enumerable in number. The Apramattasanyata (non-negligent restrained) are enumerable in number. The Pramattasanyata (negligent restrained) are enumerable in number. The Sanyatasanyata (restrained and unrestrained) are innumerable in number. The Asanyatasamyagdrishti (unrestrained with right faith) are innumerable in number. In the Manaḥparyayjnanis (possessors of telepathic knowledge), the four Upashamaka and the four Kshapakas are the least in number. The Apramattasanyata are enumerable in number. The Pramattasanyata are enumerable in number. For the Kevaljnanis (omniscient), the Ayogakevalins (non-yogic omniscient) have the same number as the Sayogakevalins (yogic omniscient).

8155. By the translation of Samyama (restraint), in the Samayika (equanimity) and Chedopasthapana Shuddhi Sanyatas (restrained with purity of renunciation), the number of the two Upashamaka is equal. From them, the Kshapakas are enumerable in number. The Apramatta (non-negligent) are enumerable in number. The Pramatta (negligent) are enumerable in number. In the Pariharavisuddhi Sanyatas (restrained with purity of expiation), the Pramatta are enumerable in number compared to the Apramatta. In the Sukshmasamparaya Shuddhi Sanyatas (restrained with subtle purity of future life), the Kshapakas are enumerable in number compared to the Upashamaka. In the Yathakyataviharavisuddhi Sanyatas (restrained with purity of actual conduct), the Kshīṇakashayas (those with destroyed passions) are enumerable in number compared to the Upashantakashayas (those with subsided passions). The Ayogakevalins are only that much. The Sayogakevalins are enumerable in number. There is no less or more between the Sanyatasanyata. In the Asanyatas, the Sasadana Samyagdrishti are the least in number. From them, the Samyagmithyadrishti are enumerable in number. From them, the Asanyatasamyagdrishti are innumerable in number. The Mithyadrishti are infinite in number.

8156. By the translation of Darshana (perception), the Cakshudarshinis (possessors of visual perception) are like the Manoyogis (those engaged in mental activities). The Acakshudarshinis (possessors of non-visual perception) are like the Kayayogis (those engaged in physical activities). The Avadhidarshinis (possessors of clairvoyant perception) are like the Avadhijnanis (possessors of clairvoyant knowledge). The Kevaldarshinis (possessors of omniscient perception) are like the Kevaljnanis (omniscient beings). The Sukshmasamparaya Kshapakas are enumerable in number. The less or more of the rest of the Gunasthanavalas (beings in different stages of spiritual development) is like the general case.

Page #186:
---------------------------
[66]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
1188 157] 157. In the context of *leshya*, the number of those with *krishna*, *nila*, and *kapota* *leshya* is like that of the *asanyata*. The number of those with *teja* and *padma* *leshya* who are *apramatta* is the least. The number of those who are *pramatta* is *sankhyeya* times more. Similarly, the number of those with other *guna-sthana* is like that of the five senses. The number of those with *shukla* *leshya* who are *upashamaka* is the least. The number of those who are *kshapka* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *sayoga-kevali* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *apramatta-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *pramatta-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *sasadan-samyagdrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyag-mithyadrsti* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *mithyadrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *asanyata-samyagdrsti* is *sankhyeya* times more.
8158. In the context of *bhavya*, the number of *bhavya* is like that of the *ogha*. The number of *abhavya* is not *alpa* or *bahutva*.
8 159. In the context of *samyaktva*, the number of those with *kshayika-samyagdrsti* who are *upashamaka* is the least. The number of the rest, up to *pramatta-samyata*, is like that of the *ogha*. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *asanyata-samyagdrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those with *kshayopashamaka-samyagdrsti* who are *apramatta* is the least. The number of those who are *pramatta* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *asanyata-samyagdrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those with *aupashamika-samyagdrsti* who are *upashamaka* is the least. The number of those who are *apramatta* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *pramatta* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *asanyata-samyagdrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of the rest, like *sasadan-samyagdrsti*, is not *alpa* or *bahutva*.
$160. In the context of *sanjna*, the number of those with *sanjna* is like that of those with *chakshudarshan*. The number of those without *sanjna* is not *alpa* or *bahutva*. The number of those who are devoid of both *sanjna* and *asanjna* is like that of those with *kevalajnana*.
8157. In the context of *leshya*, the number of those with *krishna*, *nila*, and *kapota* *leshya* is like that of the *asanyata*. The number of those with *teja* and *padma* *leshya* who are *apramatta-samyata* is the least. The number of those who are *pramatta-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. Similarly, the number of those with other *guna-sthana* is like that of the five senses. The number of those with *shukla* *leshya* who are *upashamaka* is the least. The number of those who are *kshapka* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *sayoga-kevali* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *apramatta-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *pramatta-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *sasadan-samyagdrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyag-mithyadrsti* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *mithyadrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *asanyata-samyagdrsti* is *sankhyeya* times more.
6158. In the context of *bhavya*, the number of *bhavya* is like that of the *ogha*. The number of *abhavya* is not *alpa* or *bahutva*.
159. In the context of *samyaktva*, the number of those with *kshayika-samyagdrsti* who are *upashamaka* is the least. The number of the rest, up to *pramatta-samyata*, is like that of the *ogha*. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *asanyata-samyagdrsti* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number of those with *kshayopashamaka-samyagdrsti* who are *apramatta* is the least. The number of those who are *pramatta* is *sankhyeya* times more. The number of those who are *samyata-samyata* is *asankhyeya* times more. The number

Page #187:
---------------------------
-119 § 164]
Chapter One
[67
8161. According to the translation of the term "āhāras," the number of "āhārakas" is like that of the "kāyayogis." Among the "anāhārakas," the "sayogakevalis" are the fewest. The "ayogakevalis" are countless times more than them. The "sāsādanasamyakdṛṣṭis" are countless times more than them. The "asamyatasamyagdṛṣṭis" are countless times more than them. The "mithyādṛṣṭis" are infinitely more than them.
I
8162. Thus, the general consideration of "mithyādṛṣṭi" etc. in terms of "gati" etc. has been done. In this, the subtle differences should be understood according to the "āgama."
8163. Thus, the characteristics, origin, master, object, placement, and means of attainment of "samyakdarśana," which was first mentioned, have been described. In relation to this, the names and quantities of "jīva" etc. have also been described. After this, "samyakjñāna" is worthy of consideration, therefore the next sūtra says:
"matijñāna, śrutajñāna, avadhijñāna, manas-paryayajñāna, and kevalajñāna are the five types of knowledge." ||9||
8164. The word "jñāna" in the sūtra should be combined with each word like "mati" etc. For example, "matijñāna," "śrutajñāna," "avadhijñāna," "manas-paryayajñāna," and "kevalajñāna." The meaning of "mati" derived from its etymology is: "Indriyas and manas perceive objects according to their nature, by which they contemplate, or simply contemplation is called 'mati'." The meaning of "śruta" derived from its etymology is: "When the covering karma of "āvaraṇa" is destroyed and subsided, the object that is being investigated is heard by this, or simply hearing is called 'śruta'." The mention of "mati" and "śruta" together is because there is a cause-and-effect relationship between them. As it will be said later, "śruta is preceded by mati." The meaning of "avadhi" derived from its etymology is: "Knowledge of objects that are not hidden due to lack of speech or due to being covered." "Manas" is said to be the mind that is not related to others. Due to its association, its "paryaya"

Page #188:
---------------------------
## Translation:

[68]
**Sarvarthasiddhi 194**
[119 § 164]  
**Manas-paryaya** is the knowledge of the mind's movement. If it is argued that this is **mati-jnana** (knowledge of perception), then it is not so, because it is only a matter of expectation. This knowledge is only characterized by the increased power of **kshayopa-shama** (destruction of karmas and their effects) and is only applied to one's own and others' minds. For example, "Look at the moon in the sky." Here, the reference is only to the sky. **Kevala** (omniscience) is the knowledge that is sought by those who practice **tapas** (austerities) both externally and internally. Alternatively, the word **kevala** signifies "helpless," so **kevala-jnana** is also called "helpless knowledge." **Kevala-jnana** is attained at the end, hence it is mentioned at the end of the sutra. Because it is near, **manas-paryaya** is grasped near it. 

**Question:** Why is **manas-paryaya** near **kevala-jnana**? 
**Answer:** Because both have **samyama** (concentration) as their basis, therefore **manas-paryaya** is near **kevala-jnana**. 

**Avadhi-jnana** (clairvoyance) is far from **manas-paryaya**, hence it is mentioned before **manas-paryaya**. 

**Question:** Why is **avadhi-jnana** said to be far from **manas-paryaya**? 
**Answer:** Because **avadhi-jnana** is very far from **manas-paryaya**. 

**Pratyaksha** (direct perception) is mentioned before **paroksha** (indirect perception) because it is easier. **Mati** (perception) is based on **shruta** (scriptural knowledge), which is known, familiar, and experienced, and is therefore easily attainable by almost all beings. 

Thus, there are five types of knowledge. Their distinctions will be discussed later.

**Special Note:** This sutra describes the five types of **samyak-jnana** (right knowledge) in order. Although the sutra mentions "jnana" (knowledge), it should be understood that these five are types of **samyak-jnana** because the topic is **samyak-tva** (rightness). Although the soul is inherently **kevala-jnana**, there is no difference in the original knowledge, but due to the difference in **avaranas** (veils), it is divided into five parts. 

In explaining this sutra, **Sarvarthasiddhi** highlights three main points: 
1. The etymological meaning of words like **mati** etc.
2. The reason for mentioning **mati** and **shruta** together.
3. The reason for mentioning the five types of knowledge in the order of **mati**, **shruta**, etc.

[8165]
It has been said that knowledge is attained through **pramana** (proof) and **naya** (logic). **Pramana** is considered to be knowledge by some.

Page #189:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

[11108169] **Chapter 1**

[69] **Question:** What are the objects of the senses? **Answer:** To establish that only the objects of the senses are the means of knowledge, the following sutra is stated:

**Sutra:** That (knowledge) is the means of knowledge. [1100 8166]

**Question:** What is the purpose of this sutra? **Answer:** To refute the assumption of other means of knowledge. Some people assume that **sannnikarsha** (contact) is the means of knowledge, and others assume that the senses are the means of knowledge. To refute these assumptions, the sutra states "that" (knowledge) is the means of knowledge. This means that knowledge itself is the means of knowledge, and not anything else.

[8167] **Question:** What is the flaw in considering **sannnikarsha** or the senses as the means of knowledge? **Answer:** If **sannnikarsha** is considered the means of knowledge, then there would be a possibility of not perceiving subtle, distant, or obstructed objects, because they do not come into contact with the senses. This would lead to the absence of omniscience. Similarly, if the senses are considered the means of knowledge, the same flaw arises because the objects of the senses are limited, while the objects of knowledge are unlimited.

[8168] **Question:** There is also the absence of contact between all the senses. The eye and the mind are not capable of being the object of each other. This lack of mutual objectification will be discussed later.

[8169] **Question:** If knowledge is considered the means of knowledge, then there would be a lack of fruit. In reality, knowledge itself is considered the desired fruit, not any other object. If knowledge is considered the means of knowledge, then it cannot have any other fruit. However, the means of knowledge should have a fruit. If **sannnikarsha** or the senses are considered the means of knowledge, then knowledge becomes a different fruit, which is not appropriate.

**Sutra:** The five types of knowledge are the two forms of the means of knowledge. [10]

[8166] **Question:** Why is the word "that" used in the sutra? **Answer:** The word "that" is used in the sutra to refute the assumption of those who consider **sannnikarsha** and other things as the means of knowledge. Many people believe that **sannnikarsha** is the means of knowledge, and others believe that the senses are the means of knowledge. To refute these assumptions, the word "that" is used in the sutra, which clarifies that knowledge itself is the means of knowledge, and not anything else.

[8167] **Question:** What is the flaw in considering **sannnikarsha** or the senses as the means of knowledge? **Answer:** If **sannnikarsha** is considered the means of knowledge, then there would be a possibility of not perceiving subtle, distant, or obstructed objects, because they do not come into contact with the senses. This would lead to the absence of omniscience. Similarly, if the senses are considered the means of knowledge, the same flaw arises because the objects of the senses are limited, while the objects of knowledge are unlimited.

[8168] **Question:** There is also the absence of contact between all the senses. The eye and the mind are not capable of being the object of each other. This lack of mutual objectification will be discussed later.

[8169] **Question:** If knowledge is considered the means of knowledge, then there would be a lack of fruit. In reality, knowledge itself is considered the desired fruit, not any other object. If knowledge is considered the means of knowledge, then it cannot have any other fruit. However, the means of knowledge should have a fruit. If **sannnikarsha** or the senses are considered the means of knowledge, then knowledge becomes a different fruit, which is not appropriate.

1. 'The means of knowledge are the instruments of attainment.' - [11113] Nyaya Ma.
2. 'That which is the cause of attainment is the means of knowledge.' - Tya. Va. p. 51
3. 'There is no other than this.' - Pra., Di. 1.

Page #190:
---------------------------
## 70] Sarvarthasiddhi

[11108169 Dhigama is the fruit, and because it is dual, the fruit, Dhigama, must also be dual. Therefore, the Dhigama of Aryas etc. is also obtained. If it is said that because the self is conscious, there is Samavaya in it, then it is not so; because in the absence of Jnasvabhava, all are unconscious. If Jnasvabhava is accepted, then there would be a contradiction of one's own opinion.

170. It is said that there is no fruit in knowledge being the proof. This is not a fault; because pleasure is seen in the understanding of the object. When the self, though having Jnasvabhava, is still stained by karma, pleasure arises upon the certainty of the object by the dependence on the sense organs. This is called the fruit. Indifference or the destruction of ignorance is the fruit. Indifference is the non-attachment to raga and dvesha. The destruction of ignorance, which is like darkness, is also called the fruit.

171. Praman means that which makes one know, or that by which one knows, or simply the measure of knowing. What is known by this? The object, such as the soul, etc. If proof is the cause of the knowledge of the soul, etc., then another proof must be assumed for the knowledge of the proof. If this is so, then there is an infinite regress. There is no infinite regress, just like a lamp. Just as a lamp is the cause of the illumination of pots, etc., and is also the cause of the illumination of its own form, so also there is no need to seek another illumination. Similarly, proof is also like this. It is necessary to accept this. If another proof is assumed for the proof, like the object, then there is no knowledge of oneself, and hence there is no memory. In the absence of memory, there would be no practice.

**Explanation:** It is not right to say that if proximity is considered as proof and the knowledge of the object as the fruit, then because proximity is dual, the knowledge resulting from it should also be dual. Therefore, the knowledge of pots, etc. is also obtained.

**Doubt:** The self is conscious, therefore, there is Samavaya of knowledge in it?

**Explanation:** No, because if the self is not considered to have Jnasvabhava, then all objects are found to be unconscious. If the self is considered to have Jnasvabhava, then there would be a contradiction of one's own opinion.

**170..** The first party, who said that there is no fruit in considering knowledge as proof, is not at fault; because pleasure is seen when there is knowledge of the object. Although the self has Jnasvabhava, it is still stained by karma. Therefore, when the certainty of the object arises from the dependence on the sense organs, the pleasure that arises from it is called the fruit of the proof. Or, indifference or the destruction of ignorance is the fruit of the proof. The non-occurrence of raga and dvesha-like transformations is indifference, and the removal of ignorance, which is like darkness, is the destruction of ignorance. These are also the fruits of the proof.

**171.** The meaning of the word Praman, as derived from its etymology, is - Praminoti, Pramiyate'nena Pramitimatram va Pramanam - that which makes one know well, that by which one knows well, or simply the measure of knowing.

**Doubt:** What is known by the proof?

**Explanation:** The object, such as the soul, etc. is known.

**Doubt:** If proof is the cause of the knowledge of the soul, etc., then another proof must be assumed for the knowledge of the proof. And if this is assumed, then the fault of infinite regress arises?

**Explanation:** There is no fault of infinite regress in considering proof as the cause of the knowledge of the soul, etc., just like a lamp. Just as a lamp is the cause of the illumination of pots, etc., and is also the cause of the illumination of its own form, so also there is no need to seek another illumination. Similarly, proof is also like this. This must be accepted. Now, if another proof is assumed for the proof, like the object, then there is no knowledge of oneself, and hence there is no memory. In the absence of memory, there would be no practice.

1. 'Ajnana Nivritti Hanopaadanoupekshaasch Falm. - P. Mu. 5191' Yada Sannikarshastatda Gnan Pramitih. Yada Gnanam Tadah Hanopaadanoupeksha Buddhayah Falm. - 11113 Nya. Bha. | 2. - Lajnaanabhavah Ajnana Nasho Mu. | 3. - Vigame Anya - Mu. | 4. Hetuh Tat-sv - Mu. | 5. - Antaram Asya Mrigam - Mu. |

Page #191:
---------------------------
## Chapter One

[71 8172. The dual-number reference is in relation to the distinctions that will be explained later. For it will be said, "The first is indirect, the other is direct." This dual-number reference is meant to negate the existence of other types of knowledge.
8 72. The dual-number reference in the sutra is in relation to the distinctions that will be explained later. It will be said, "The first is indirect, the other is direct." This dual-number reference is meant to negate the existence of other types of knowledge.

**Special Note:** In the previous sutra, five types of right knowledge were discussed, and in this sutra, their validity is explained. While it is clear that right knowledge is valid, other schools of thought do not consider knowledge as the primary source of knowledge, but rather consider proximity or sense organs as the source of knowledge. Therefore, here it is explained that proximity, etc., are not the source of knowledge, but knowledge itself is the source of knowledge. In the Sarvarthasiddhi commentary, two main views are mentioned and criticized. Both these views are accepted by the Nyaya school. The Nyaya school considers both proximity and sense organs as the source of knowledge in the origin of direct knowledge. The view that proximity is the source of knowledge is mentioned in the Nyaya Bhashya, and the view that sense organs are the source of knowledge is mentioned in Uddyotakara's Nyaya Varttika. However, when the Sarvarthasiddhikar mentions this second view, it seems to be as ancient as the first view. It is very likely that the Sarvarthasiddhikar mentioned the Sankhya view that "sense organ activity is the source of knowledge," and there is no surprise in that. The Nyaya school considers proximity as an extraordinary cause in the origin of direct knowledge and considers it as the source of knowledge. However, later on, the term "cause" is used for the "extraordinary cause." This definition has been replaced by the definition of "cause" as "the cause that is involved in activity," which has led to the acceptance of sense organs as the source of knowledge in their school. When they consider proximity as the source of knowledge, knowledge is considered its result, and when they consider sense organs as the source of knowledge, proximity is considered the activity of the sense organs, and knowledge is considered its result. This does not mean that they do not consider knowledge as the source of knowledge. They also consider knowledge as the source of knowledge in their school. When they consider knowledge as the source of knowledge, then right understanding, wrong understanding, and indifference are considered its results. However, the Nyaya school's view of considering proximity and sense organs as the source of knowledge is not appropriate. This is the conclusion reached in the commentary on this sutra. The following are the flaws in considering proximity as the source of knowledge: 1. Knowledge of subtle, obstructed, and distant objects is not possible, therefore, omniscience is absent. 2. Knowledge cannot be generated by the eye and mind because they are incapable of acquiring knowledge. 3. It is not appropriate to consider each sense organ as having a separate object, because the eye's contact with form makes it the generator of knowledge of form, and similarly, it also has contact with taste, therefore, it should also generate knowledge of taste. 4. Proximity is not a single entity, but rather a combination of two or more entities, namely the sense organ and the object, therefore, the result of proximity, which is knowledge, should also be present in both. The following are the flaws in considering sense organs as the source of knowledge: 1. Omniscience is absent because sense organs are incapable of knowing all objects simultaneously. 2. Omniscience is also absent because knowledge of subtle, obstructed, and distant objects is not possible through sense organs. 3. Knowledge such as inference, etc., cannot be generated because these types of knowledge are not generated by sense organs. There are other flaws in considering proximity and sense organs as the source of knowledge. Those who consider proximity and sense organs as the source of knowledge raise a major objection to considering knowledge as the source of knowledge, saying that if knowledge is considered the source of knowledge, then the source of knowledge becomes ineffective. However, this objection is also not appropriate because...

|

Page #192:
---------------------------
72]] Sarvarthasiddhau
[11108173 - $ 173. 'The knowledge of the five factors mentioned above is included in the two proofs. To refute the idea that the two proofs are प्रत्यक्ष (direct perception) and अनुमान (inference) etc., the following sutra is stated:
The first two are indirect proofs. ||1|| 8174. The word 'आदि' (ādi) indicates priority. What is first is called 'आद्य' (ādy). How can there be two firsts? The answer is that the first is the main and the second is the secondary.  The knowledge of मति (mati) is the first according to the main concept, and the knowledge of श्रुत (śruta) is also considered first because it is close to it. The word 'आद्य' (ādy) is used in the dual form, so it also includes the secondary. The compound word 'आद्यच आद्य च आद्य' (ādyaca ādyaca ādy) means both the knowledge of मति (mati) and the knowledge of श्रुत (śruta). Both of these are indirect proofs. Question: Why are these two indirect proofs? Answer: Because they are dependent on something else. It will be said later that "the knowledge of मति (mati) is caused by the senses and non-senses" and "the object of श्रुत (śruta) is non-sensory." Therefore, 'पर' (para) here refers to the senses, mind, light, instruction, etc., which are external causes. The meaning is that the knowledge of मति (mati) and the knowledge of श्रुत (śruta) arise in the soul, which is dependent on the destruction and cessation of the karmas that obscure them, and which is dependent on the external causes of the senses, mind, light, instruction, etc. 
1. त्यर्थः । .  उपमानार्थापत्त्यादीनामत्रैवान्तर्भावादुक्त-मु.। 2. –क्षत्वम् ? परोपेक्षत्वात् । मति  आ., दि. 1, दि. 21

Page #193:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

[112 8 176] Chapter 1
[73 brought. Therefore, inference, analogy, etc. are included in this. 8 175. To explain that all other knowledge except that which is directly perceived is indirect, the sutra says:
"Other than direct perception is indirect." ||12|| 8176. "Akshnauti, vyaapnoti, jaanaati" - the soul is Akshya. The knowledge that is constant in the soul, which has attained the destruction and cessation of the karmas of knowledge, and is free from the veils, is direct perception. Avadhi-darshan and Kevala-darshan are also Akshya, and therefore, they are also included in this. This is not a fault, because the word "knowledge" is implied, which negates the meaning of "darshan". Even though there are many types of knowledge, they are all Akshya, and therefore, they are all direct perception. Those that are not Akshya are called indirect. Inference, analogy, etc. are also not Akshya, and therefore, they are also included in this.

**Special Note:** In the previous sutra, two types of proofs were mentioned. It remains to be explained what these two proofs are and how the five types of knowledge are divided among them. Therefore, the eleventh and twelfth sutras explain this. The eleventh sutra explains the indirect nature of the first type of proof and includes mati-gyan and shruti-gyan in it. Others define indirect knowledge as that which is not the object of the senses. However, in the Jain tradition, indirectness and directness are considered as the nature of knowledge, and they are explained accordingly. According to the Jain tradition, knowledge that is obtained through the help of others, i.e., knowledge that is obtained through the Akshya, or the soul, is called indirect knowledge. The word "paroksha" is used in this sense. Mati-gyan and shruti-gyan are both types of knowledge that cannot be obtained without the help of the senses, mind, light, and teachings, etc. Therefore, they are both considered indirect. In philosophical texts, sensory knowledge is mentioned as direct knowledge in a practical sense. Therefore, this statement should be understood in a formal sense. Others have defined Akshya as the senses and have called sensory knowledge as direct perception. In that context, sensory knowledge is written as direct perception in a practical sense. In reality, all knowledge that is obtained through means other than the soul is indirect. Inference, analogy, etc., and all other types of knowledge are also not obtained without the help of others. Therefore, they are all included in these two types of knowledge, namely mati-gyan and shruti-gyan. It is important to note that these types of knowledge are not obtained only through external means. The destruction and cessation of the karmas of mati-gyan and shruti-gyan are essential for their origin. Without the soul's ability to do so, these types of knowledge cannot be obtained. When the soul has this ability, these types of knowledge arise in relation to external means. This is the essence of the above statement.

8175 The characteristic of indirect knowledge was stated. To explain that all other types of knowledge are direct, the next sutra says:
"All other knowledge is direct proof." ||12||

8176 The etymological meaning of the word "Akshya" is: "Akshnauti, vyaapnoti, jaanaati" - the soul is Akshya. The roots "Akshnauti", "vyaapnoti", and "jaanaati" have the same meaning, therefore, the meaning of "Akshya" is the soul. Thus, the knowledge that is constant in the soul, which has attained the destruction and cessation of the veils, and is free from the veils, i.e., the knowledge that is not obtained through external means such as the senses, but only through the soul that has attained the destruction and cessation of the veils, is called direct perception.

**Doubt:** Avadhi-darshan and Kevala-darshan are also Akshya, i.e., they are also constant in the soul. Therefore, they are also included in the meaning of the word "direct perception".

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because the word "knowledge" is implied in the context, which negates the meaning of "darshan". 1.-Knowledge is also constant in the soul.

Page #194:
---------------------------
74] Sarvarthasiddhi
[1112 8 176 - It is also possible to accept this (Vibhangajñana) as a constant. But due to the authority of the term 'Samyak', it is negated. The term 'Samyak' is carried forward, which makes knowledge specific, and therefore Vibhangajñana is negated. This is because Vibhangajñana is the object of opposite meaning due to the rise of Mithyadarshana, and therefore it is not Samyak.
8177. It may be argued that knowledge generated by the activity of the senses is direct, and knowledge that is not generated by the activity of the senses is indirect. This is an inconsistent definition that should be accepted. This is not correct, because it would lead to the absence of direct knowledge in an Aapta. If knowledge that is caused by the senses is considered direct, then an Aapta would not have direct knowledge. For an Aapta does not have knowledge of objects through the senses. If it is argued that an Aapta also has knowledge through the senses, then he would not be omniscient. If it is argued that an Aapta has mental direct knowledge, then due to the effort of the mind, there would be no omniscience. If it is argued that this is established by the scriptures, then this is not correct, because the scriptures are obtained through direct knowledge.
178. If it is argued that there is another kind of knowledge called Yogiprayaksha, which is divine, then this is not direct knowledge, because it is not caused by the senses. It is accepted that whatever is related to each sense is direct knowledge.
8179. Furthermore, the absence of omniscience is a contradiction of the statement. The knowledge of this Yogi is either sequential or simultaneous. If it is sequential, then 
1.  
2. 'The activity of the sense organ with respect to its object is direct knowledge.' - Nyaya Bhasya 1,1,3
3. 'What is called indirect is indirect. The ultimate object is indirect.' - Pa. Ma. Ma. 3121211151
4.  
5.  
6. 'The inability to have simultaneous knowledge is the sign of the mind.' - Nyaya Sutra 1111161
7.  
8.  
9. 'Whatever is related to each sense is direct knowledge.' - Nyaya Bindu Tika Pu. 11.

Page #195:
---------------------------
- Chapter 1
118. It could be that it grasps multiple meanings. If it is due to the opposite meaning, then the yogi does not have omniscience, because the knowable is infinite. And if it grasps multiple meanings, then the vow, "Just as one knowledge does not know two meanings, so two knowledges do not know one meaning," is negated.
8180. Or the vow, "All formations are momentary," is negated; because according to your view, one knowledge that exists for many moments is accepted. For grasping multiple meanings is only in sequence. If it is simultaneous, then the moment of its birth is only for the attainment of the self. Because after attaining the self, it is engaged in some action of its own. If it is like a lamp, then even in the case of its being the object of many parts, the acceptance of the illuminating and the illuminated is true. Because of its being beyond alternatives, there is also the implication of its emptiness.
It does not remain.
This yogi does not have omniscience, because the knowable is infinite. And if it grasps multiple meanings simultaneously, then the vow, "Just as one knowledge does not know two meanings, so two knowledges do not know one meaning," is negated.
$180. Or the vow, "All formations are momentary," is negated; because according to your view, one knowledge that exists for many moments is accepted. Therefore, the grasping of multiple objects is only in sequence.
Doubt-The grasping of multiple objects will happen simultaneously.
Solution-At the time of the birth of knowledge, it only attains its own nature, because any object only engages in its own action after attaining its own nature.
Doubt-Knowledge is like a lamp, therefore both things will happen simultaneously.
Solution-No, because it is accepted that it illuminates the objects to be illuminated only when it exists for many moments. If knowledge is considered to be beyond alternatives, then emptiness is attained.
Special Meaning-In this sutra, it is explained which knowledges are direct. In the context, light is shed on these characteristics in its commentary.
1. The meaning of the word 'aksha'. 2. The etymology of the word 'pratyaksha'. 3. The meaning of the word 'aksha' and the defects that arise when the word 'pratyaksha' is defined as the sense organ or mind. 4. Omniscience is not attained through scripture, but scripture is attained only after direct knowledge. 5. Discussion of the defects that arise when the definition of direct knowledge as accepted by the Buddhists is accepted. 6. In the context, how omniscience is not attained in the case of the Buddhists and how the defect of negation of the vow arises. The meaning of what is written while clarifying the third point is that omniscience is not attained by considering direct knowledge to be caused by the sense organs or mind. The Vedas are capable of giving knowledge of the past, future, present, distant, subtle, etc. This gives knowledge of all objects. Therefore, there is no objection to considering sense-organ-generated knowledge and mind-generated knowledge as direct knowledge. The Mimamsakas believe this. But their belief is not appropriate, because scripture cannot be attained without direct knowledge. This is explained by the fourth characteristic. The Buddhists also consider the meaning of 'aksha' to be the sense organ and consider sense-organ-generated knowledge to be direct knowledge, but why their belief is not appropriate is explained by the fifth characteristic. The remaining statement is easy to understand.
1. 'Kshanika: sarvasankhara: sthiraanam kuta: kriya. Bhutiesham kriya saiwa karaka saiwa cocyate.' ... 2. Kshanavatyek-m.

Page #196:
---------------------------
76]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
8181. To understand the specific types of **aviprakara** (non-differentiation) of the **pramana** (means of knowledge) which is stated in both places, it is said:
**Mati**, **Smriti**, **Sanjna**, **Chinta**, and **Abhinibodha** are synonyms. ||13||
8182. 1. Firstly, the knowledge that is stated, its synonyms should be known; because these are the objects of use arising from the **avaranakshaya** (destruction of karmic veils) and **upashama** (sublimation) of **matijnana** (knowledge of the mind), and they are not used in **shruta** (scriptural knowledge) etc. **Manana** is **mati**, **smarana** is **smriti**, **sanjnana** is **sanjna**, **chintana** is **chinta**, and **abhinibodhana** is **abhinibodha**. As far as possible, other **vigraha** (analyses) should be known. 183. Even though there is a difference in their nature, they are synonyms due to the strength of usage. For example, **Indra**, **Shakra**, and **Purandara** are all names for the same **Shachipati** (Lord of Shachi), even though there is a difference in the actions of **Indana** etc. If we consider the meaning of these words according to the **samabhirudha** (common usage) **naya** (principle), then we find a difference in the meaning of **mati** etc. However, the intended meaning here is that they do not transcend the use arising from the **avaranakshaya** and **upashama** of **matijnana**. The word "**iti**" is used to indicate the type. Thus, these are synonyms of **matijnana**. Or, the word "**mati**" is used to indicate the object. According to this, the meaning conveyed by **mati**, **smriti**, **sanjna**, **chinta**, and **abhinibodha** is one and the same.
[1113 § 181
$ 181 **Pramana** is said to have two types: **pratyaksha** (direct perception) and **paroksha** (indirect perception). Now, we will state the next **sutra** (aphorism) to explain the specific types of the first type of **pramana**.
**Mati**, **Smriti**, **Sanjna**, **Chinta**, and **Abhinibodha** are synonyms. || 13u
8182. The knowledge that is stated in the beginning, its synonyms should be known, because these are the objects of use arising from the **avaranakshaya** and **upashama** of **matijnana**, and they are not used in **shruta** etc. **Manana** is **mati**, **smarana** is **smriti**, **sanjnana** is **sanjna**, **chintana** is **chinta**, and **abhinibodhana** is **abhinibodha**. As far as possible, other **vigraha** should be known.
8183. Even though these words have different natures, i.e., even though they are formed from different roots, they are synonyms due to usage. For example, **Indra**, **Shakra**, and **Purandara**. Even though there is a difference in the actions of **Indana** etc., these are all names for the same **Shachipati**. Now, if we consider the meaning of these words according to the **samabhirudha naya**, then we find a difference in the meaning of **mati** etc. However, the intended meaning here is that these **mati** etc. do not transcend the use arising from the **avaranakshaya** and **upashama** of **matijnana**. In the text, the word "**iti**" is used to indicate the type, which means that these **mati** etc. are synonyms of **matijnana**. Or, in the text, the word "**mati**" is used to indicate the object, which means that the meaning conveyed by **mati**, **smriti**, **sanjna**, **chinta**, and **abhinibodha** is one and the same.
**Special Note:** This **sutra** gives the synonyms of **matijnana**. In the **Prakrti Anuyoga** chapter of the **Shatkhandagama**, these are also given as synonyms of **matijnana**. The only difference is that there, instead of **vijnana** (knowledge), the term **abhinibodhikjnana** is used, and then its four synonyms are given: **sanjna**, **smriti**, **mati**, and **chinta**. This makes it worth considering the view of those who interpret the meaning of **mati** as present knowledge, **smriti** as remembered knowledge, **sanjna** as recognition, **chinta** as reasoning, and **abhinibodha** as inference. In reality, these terms refer to various types of knowledge.
1. **Aadi yaduddishtan jnanam mu.** | 2. **"Bahvo hi shabda ekarttha bhavanti. Tadyatha - 'Indra: Shakra: Puruhuta: Purandara:'.** Pa. Ma. Bha. 11212145 3. **Sanjna:** | Sama - Mu. 4. **Nativaratat iti mu.** |
5. **Karartham. Evam a, di. 1, di 2.** **"Hetvaevam prakare cha vyavachchede viparyaye. Pradurbhaave samaapti cha iti shabda: prakirtita:."** - Ane. Na. Shlo. |

Page #197:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**§ 184.** Now, to explain what is the cause of the attainment of knowledge, the following sutra says:

It (knowledge) is caused by the senses and the mind. ||14||

**§ 185.** The word "Indra" means "one who rules" or "one who has power." The word "Indra" also refers to the soul. Although the soul is inherently capable of knowing, it is unable to perceive objects on its own due to the obscuring karmas of knowledge. Therefore, the instrument that enables the soul to perceive objects is called the "Indriya" (sense organ), which is the "linga" (sign) of the soul. Alternatively, "linga" means "that which reveals the hidden." According to this, "Indriya" refers to the instrument that reveals the existence of the subtle soul. Just as smoke reveals the presence of fire, similarly, the sense organs like touch, etc., reveal the existence of the knower, because they cannot exist without the soul, the knower. Alternatively, "Indra" is a name-giving karma. Therefore, the sense organs are created by it. These sense organs, like touch, etc., will be discussed later.

**§ 186.** "Anindriya" (non-sense), "Manas" (mind), and "Antahkarana" (inner organ) are synonyms.

**Doubt:** How can the word "Anindriya" (non-sense) be applied to the mind, which is the "linga" (sign) of the soul, when the word "Anindriya" negates the sense?

**Solution:** The word "na" (not) here is used in the sense of "eeshad" (slightly). It means "slightly sense, slightly non-sense." Just as the word "anudara" (not having a belly) does not mean the complete absence of a belly, but rather a slightly smaller belly, similarly, we should understand it here.

**Doubt:** "Anindriya"

Page #198:
---------------------------
## 78]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[1114 § 186
How is the meaning of "slightly" (ईषद्) taken here, instead of the meaning of "not at all" (नत्र) in relation to the non-sensory? 
Solution: These senses are the objects of things located in a fixed place and they remain in that state for a period of time. But the mind, even though it is the organ of the senses, is not the object of things located in a fixed place and it does not remain in that state for a period of time.
§ 187. This is called the inner organ (Antahkarana). It is not dependent on the senses for its activities like thinking about qualities and defects, remembering, etc., and it is not perceivable externally like the eye, etc. Therefore, it is called the inner organ because it is an internal instrument. Therefore, the meaning of "slightly" (ईषद्) is taken in relation to the non-sensory, instead of the meaning of "not at all" (नत्र).
8188 Doubt: Why is the word "that" (तत्) used in the sutra? Solution: The word "that" (तत्) in the sutra is used to refer to the knowledge of perception (मतिज्ञान). Doubt: The reference to the knowledge of perception (मतिज्ञान) is made immediately after, and there is a rule that "the injunction or prohibition applies only to the immediately following object." Therefore, even if the word "that" (तत्) is not used in the sutra, the knowledge of perception (मतिज्ञान) is still understood. Solution: The word "that" (तत्) is used to refer to this sutra and the next sutra. The knowledge referred to by the words like "perception" (मति), etc., is caused by the sensory and non-sensory, and its four aspects are apprehension (अवग्रह), desire (ईहा), aversion (अवाय), and retention (धारणा). Therefore, the aforementioned fault does not arise. If the word "that" (तत्) is not used, then the words like "perception" (मति), etc., will refer to the first knowledge, and the knowledge caused by the sensory and non-sensory will be called "heard knowledge" (श्रुतज्ञान), and its four aspects will be apprehension (अवग्रह), desire (ईहा), aversion (अवाय), and retention (धारणा). This will lead to the connection of an undesirable meaning. Therefore, it is necessary to use the word "that" (तत्) in the sutra to avoid the connection of this undesirable meaning.
Special Note: This sutra discusses the causes of the origin of the knowledge of perception (मतिज्ञान), and it mentions two types based on the difference between the senses and the mind. Although meaning (अर्थ), light (आलोक), etc., are also causes in the origin of this knowledge, they are not invariable causes, so they are not mentioned here. This sutra sheds light on the meaning of the words "sensory" (इन्द्रिय) and "non-sensory" (अनिन्द्रिय), explaining that the senses are the objects of things located in a fixed place and they remain in that state for a period of time, while the mind is not the object of things located in a fixed place and it does not remain in that state for a period of time.
1. 'Anudara Kanyeti.' Pa. Ma. Bha. 61312142 1 2. 'Indrasya ve Sato Manasa Indriyebhyah Prithagupodesho Dharmabhedat. Bhautikani Indriyani Niyata Vishayani, Sagunanan Chaishamindiriyabhava iti. Manastva Bhautika Sarvavishayam cha... .' Nya. Ma. 11114 | 'Sarvavishayam Antahkaranam Manah. Nya. Ma. 11119 1 3. Tam Karanamityu- Mu.

Page #199:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**179**
[-1158190]

**8189.**  Thus, the cause of the origin of knowledge has been explained, but its distinctions have not yet been determined. Therefore, to explain these distinctions, the next sutra says:

**8190.**  **Avagraha, Iha, Avaya, and Dharana are the four distinctions of knowledge.** ||15||

**190.** The first apprehension that occurs after the conjunction of the object and the subject is called **Avagraha**. When the object and the subject come together, perception occurs. The apprehension of the object that follows this is called **Avagraha**. For example, the apprehension of "this is a white form" by the eye is **Avagraha**.

**Iha** is the desire to know the specific nature of the object apprehended by **Avagraha**. For example, after seeing the white form, one may wonder, "Is it a banner or a garland?" This desire to know the specific nature is **Iha**.

**Avaya** is the knowledge of the true nature of the object obtained through the determination of its specific characteristics. For example, through the observation of its origin, fall, and movement, one may conclude, "It is a garland, not a banner." This certainty is **Avaya**.

**Dharana** is the cause that prevents forgetting the known object over time. For example, "This is the same garland that I saw this morning." This remembrance is **Dharana**.

The order of presentation of these terms in the sutra follows the order of their origin. This means that the terms are presented in the sutra in the same order in which they arise in the process of knowledge.

**Special Note:** This sutra describes four distinctions of knowledge. These distinctions are based on the primary function of knowledge. Therefore, the cessation of knowledge is also considered to be of these four types. This statement explains the order in which knowledge apprehends an object. The nature of these distinctions has already been explained in the commentary.

**Specific Points:**

1. **Madya graha-mu.**
2. **Marthasy graha-mu.**
3. **Pataket-mu.**
4. **Utpatanapksha-a., di. 1, di. 21**
5. **Arthatasya–mu.**
6. **"Tayanantaraṁ tayathāvicchavaṇaṁ jo ya vāsaṇajogo. Kālantaraṁ ya jaṁ puṇaranusaraṇaṁ dhāraṇā sāu." - Vi. Bha. Ga. 291.**
7. **"Īhijjai nāgahiyam najjai nāṇīhiyam na yāvāyaṁ. Dhārijjai jaṁ vatthaṁ leṇa kamo'vaggahāīpro" - Vi. Ma. Ga. 2961.**

Page #200:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

[11168 1918191. To understand the different types of Avagraha and other concepts, the following sutra is stated -
"Setara (along with its opposite) Bahu, Bahuvidha, Kshipra, Anissruta, Anukta, and Dhruva are the types of Avagraha, Iha, Avaya, and Dharana forms of Matijnana." ||16|| 8192. This section deals with specific actions like Avagraha, etc.  The karmakaraka (object of action) is indicated as "Bahvadi naam Setara naam". The word "Bahu" can refer to both quantity and abundance. Both meanings are included here as there is no specific context.  Examples of "Bahu" as a number are: one, two, many. Examples of "Bahu" as abundance are: much rice, much soup. The word "Vidha" refers to types. The word "Kshipra" in the sutra is used to indicate knowledge that is acquired quickly. When a complete object is not revealed, but only a part is revealed, and the rest remains hidden, it is called "Anissruta". Here, "Anissruta" means "slightly revealed", hence the word "Anissruta" is used in the sutra. The word "Anukta" is used to indicate knowledge that is acquired through implication, whether it is spoken or unspoken. The word "Dhruva" is used to indicate knowledge that is acquired continuously and truthfully. The word "Setara" is used to indicate the collection of opposite concepts.
193. There are twelve types of Avagraha: Bahu's Avagraha, Alpa's Avagraha, Bahuvidha's Avagraha, Ekavidha's Avagraha, Kshipra Avagraha, Chirena Avagraha, Anissruta's Avagraha, Nissruta's Avagraha, Anukta's Avagraha, Ukta's Avagraha, Dhruva's Avagraha, and Adhruva's Avagraha. Similarly, there are twelve types of Iha, Avaya, and Dharana. All these are generated by the five senses and the mind individually. Among these, Bahu Avagraha, etc., are caused by the destruction and pacification of the Matijnana Avarana Karma, while the others are not. Bahu, etc., are superior, hence they are mentioned first.
-1. "Atsyav संख्यावाची. Tadyatha eko dhau bahu iti." - Pa. Ma. Bha. 114121211 2. "Bahurodano bahu sup iti." - Pa. Ma. Ma. 11412121. 3. Dhruvam yatha - Ta., Na. 
]

Page #201:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1
[81]

**8194.** What is the difference between *bahu* (many) and *bahuvidha* (manifold)?  Since both *bahu* and *bahuvidha* imply multiplicity, what is the distinction? The difference lies in the aspect of *ekaprakara* (one type) and *nana-prakara* (various types).  *Bahu* does not imply different types, while *bahuvidha* does.

What is the difference between *ukta* (said) and *nihsrita* (emanated)?  Since everything that is emanated is also said, what is the distinction? The difference is that *ukta* refers to the grasping of an object through the instruction of another, while *nihsrita* refers to the grasping of an object by oneself.

**195.** Some teachers read the text as "kshipra-nihsrita" (quickly emanated). They explain it as follows: When one hears a sound through the ear, one may know that it is the sound of a peacock or a cuckoo. Another may know it by relying on its form.

**196.** What is the difference between *dhruva-avagraha* (firm grasping) and *dharana* (retention)?  It is said that at the time of the attainment of *kshayopashama* (cessation of karmic afflictions), the *avagraha* (grasping) that occurs due to the continuous stream of pure *parinama* (transformation) remains the same in the first, second, and subsequent moments, neither decreasing nor increasing. This is called *dhruva-avagraha*. However, when *kshayopashama* arises from the mixture of pure and impure *parinama*, the resulting *avagraha* may be of many, few, manifold, or single types. In other words, there is a fluctuation in its quantity and quality. This is called *adhruva-avagraha*.  *Dharana*, on the other hand, refers to the knowledge that prevents forgetting the grasped object. Therefore, there is a significant difference between *dhruva-avagraha* and *dharana*.

**8191.** **Doubt:** What is the difference between *bahu* (many) and *bahuvidha* (manifold)? Since both *bahu* and *bahuvidha* imply multiplicity, what is the distinction?

**Solution:** The difference lies in the aspect of *ekaprakara* (one type) and *nana-prakara* (various types).  *Bahu* does not imply different types, while *bahuvidha* does.

**Doubt:** What is the difference between *ukta* (said) and *nihsrita* (emanated)?  Since everything that is emanated is also said, what is the distinction?

**Solution:** The difference is that *ukta* refers to the grasping of an object through the instruction of another, while *nihsrita* refers to the grasping of an object by oneself.

**195.** Some teachers read the text as "kshipra-nihsrita" (quickly emanated). They explain it as follows: When one hears a sound through the ear, one may know that it is the sound of a peacock or a cuckoo. Another may know it by relying on its form.

**8196.** **Doubt:** What is the difference between *dhruva-avagraha* (firm grasping) and *dharana* (retention)?

**Solution:** At the time of the attainment of *kshayopashama* (cessation of karmic afflictions), the *avagraha* (grasping) that occurs due to the continuous stream of pure *parinama* (transformation) remains the same in the first, second, and subsequent moments, neither decreasing nor increasing. This is called *dhruva-avagraha*. However, when *kshayopashama* arises from the mixture of pure and impure *parinama*, the resulting *avagraha* may be of many, few, manifold, or single types. In other words, there is a fluctuation in its quantity and quality. This is called *adhruva-avagraha*.  *Dharana*, on the other hand, refers to the knowledge that prevents forgetting the grasped object. Therefore, there is a significant difference between *dhruva-avagraha* and *dharana*.

**Special Note:** These *avagraha* etc. are different types of actions of knowing through *mati-jnana* (knowledge of perception), and *bahu* etc. are their respective actions. Therefore, they are mentioned in this sutra in a concise manner. The meaning is that through *mati-jnana*, objects are grasped, perceived, rejected, and retained in various ways, such as *bahu* etc. The nature of these *bahu* etc. and their differences are explained in the commentary. It seems that during the time of Pujyapada Swami, there were two readings of this sutra, and it was also explained in two ways, which Pujyapada Swami himself mentioned. He explained the reading that was more accepted at that time or the one that he considered the original text. 1. *bahu* and *bahuvidha*. - Mu. 2. *meva-nihsrita* - A., Di. 1, Di. 2, Mu. 1 3. *nouna-abhya* - Ta., N., Mu.

Page #202:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi

**11168 197:**  If Avagraha etc. are the knowers of Bahu etc., then what is the qualifier of Bahu etc.? To answer this, the next sutra says:

**_Arthasya_ (Of the object) Avagraha, Iha, Avaya and Dharana, these four are the types of Matijnana.  ||17||**

**198:** The object of the senses like eye etc. is called 'Artha'.  It should be understood that Avagraha etc. are of that 'Artha' which is qualified by Bahu etc.  Doubt: Since Bahu etc. are themselves 'Artha', why is this sutra said?  Solution: It is true that Bahu etc. are themselves 'Artha', but this sutra 'Arthasya' is said to refute the theory of other schools.  Some schools believe that qualities like Rupa etc. are the ones that come in contact with the senses, and therefore, they are the ones that are grasped.  But this is not correct, because these qualities like Rupa etc. are intangible and cannot come in contact with the senses.  Doubt: If this is the case, then how can we say "I saw the Rupa, I smelled the Gandha"?  Solution:  What is grasped by the senses or what is grasped through the senses is called 'Artha'.  According to this, 'Artha' is the substance.  When it comes in contact with the senses, since Rupa etc. are inseparable from it, therefore, it is also possible to say "I saw the Rupa, I smelled the Gandha" in relation to Rupa etc.

**Special Note:** The object of knowledge is neither general nor specific, but a substance that is both.  The sutra 'Arthasya' is composed to explain this very point.  This refutes the view of the Nyaya and Vaisheshika schools that qualities like Rupa etc. come in contact with the senses.

**199:** Are these Avagraha etc. of all the senses and mind, or is there some difference in relation to the object?  To answer this, the next sutra says:

**Vyanjanasya Avagraha (It is the Avagraha of the Vyanjana). ||18||**

Page #203:
---------------------------
[83
 1119 8 201]
Chapter One 8 200. The term *vyanjana* refers to the unmanifest state of sound and other objects. Its *avagraha* is the only thing that exists, not *iha* etc. Why is this? It is to establish a rule, that *avagraha* is the only thing that exists, not *iha* etc. Should the *evakara* be used in this sutra? It should not be used, because "when a rule is established, a subsequent rule is for the purpose of establishing a rule" (Pa. Ma. Bha. 1, 1, 31). Therefore, even without the *evakara*, the sutra will serve its purpose of establishing a rule. But, the term *avagraha* is used in both places, so what is the difference? The difference lies in the *avagraha* of the meaning and the *avagraha* of the *vyanjana*, in terms of the manifest and unmanifest. How? Like the formation of a new mountain from water droplets. Just as two or three water droplets do not make a mountain wet, but when they are repeatedly poured, it gradually becomes a mountain, similarly, the *pudgalas* that are the form of sound etc., which are perceived by the senses of hearing etc., do not become manifest in two or three moments, but become manifest when they are repeatedly perceived. Therefore, before the perception of the manifest, there is the *avagraha* of the *vyanjana*, and the perception of the manifest is called *artha-avagraha*. This is why *iha* etc. do not exist before the perception of the unmanifest. 8 201. To prohibit the possibility of *vyanjana-avagraha* being present in all senses without exception, the next sutra says:
Not by the eye and the mind. ||19|| 8200. The unmanifest sound etc. is called *vyanjana*. Its *avagraha* is the only thing that exists, not *iha* etc. Question-Why is this sutra? Answer-This sutra is to establish a rule that *avagraha* is the only thing that exists, not *iha* etc. Question-Then, the *evakara* should be used in this sutra. Answer-It should not be used, because "when a rule is established, a subsequent rule is for the purpose of establishing a rule" (Pa. Ma. Bha. 1, 1, 31). Therefore, even without the *evakara*, the sutra will serve its purpose of establishing a rule. Question-But, the term *avagraha* is used in both places, so what is the difference? Answer-The difference lies in the *avagraha* of the meaning and the *avagraha* of the *vyanjana*, in terms of the manifest and unmanifest. Question-How? Answer-Like the formation of a new mountain from water droplets. Just as two or three water droplets do not make a mountain wet, but when they are repeatedly poured, it gradually becomes a mountain, similarly, the *pudgalas* that are the form of sound etc., which are perceived by the senses of hearing etc., do not become manifest in two or three moments, but become manifest when they are repeatedly perceived. Therefore, before the perception of the manifest, there is the *avagraha* of the *vyanjana*, and the perception of the manifest is called *artha-avagraha*. This is why *iha* etc. do not exist before the perception of the unmanifest.
Special Note-Here, the unmanifest sound etc. is called *vyanjana*. But, Vira Sena Swami does not agree with this definition. According to him, the first perception of the acquired meaning is called *vyanjana*. On reflection, it is clear that these two definitions are given due to a difference in perspective. In reality, there is no difference between them. Both Pujya Pada Swami and Vira Sena Swami agree that the first perception of the acquired meaning is *vyanjana*. Only Pujya Pada Swami has given the special epithet "unmanifest" before the word "sound" to explain the state of the object at the time of the first perception by the senses of touch, taste, smell, and hearing. But, Vira Sena Swami has not given such a special epithet. The rest of the statement is easy to understand.
$ 201. To prohibit the possibility of *vyanjana-avagraha* being present in all senses without exception, the next sutra says:
Not by the eye and the mind. ||19|| 1. 'तक्कालम्मि वि णाणं तत्थत्थि तणं ति तो तमव्वत्त । वि. भा. गा. 196। 2.-ग्रहो भवति । किम-दि. 1, दि. 2, आ., मु. । 3. 'सिद्धे विधिरारभ्यमाणो ज्ञापकार्थो भवति'-पा. म. भा. 1, 1,31 4. द्वित्रिसि-मु.। 5. द्वित्र्यादि-मु.।

Page #204:
---------------------------
## 84]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[119 $202 -
8 202. There is no *vyanjanavagraha* (perception of the object through its qualities) by the eye and mind. Why? Because they are *apraapyakari* (not capable of acquiring the object). The eye perceives an object that is not acquired, is suitable, is situated in a direction that is suitable, is situated in a place that is suitable for proximity, and is manifested by external light, etc. The mind also perceives an object that is not acquired. Therefore, there is no *vyanjanavagraha* by these two.
8 203. How is it known that the eye is *apraapyakari*? It is known from the scriptures and reason. From the scriptures, as in: "The ear hears a sound that is not touched, and the eye sees a form that is not touched. Similarly, the nose, tongue, and touch senses know the smell, taste, and touch that are not touched."
$ 204. From reason, as follows: The eye is *apraapyakari* because it does not perceive an object that is touched. If the eye were *praapyakari* (capable of acquiring the object), it would perceive the *anjana* (collyrium) that is touched, like the skin sense. But it does not perceive the *anjana* that is touched. From this, it is known that the eye is *apraapyakari* like the mind. Therefore, it is established that there is *vyanjanavagraha* by the remaining senses, excluding the eye and mind. And there is *arthaavagraha* (perception of the object) by all the senses and the mind.

**Special Note:** Earlier, two types of *avagraha* (perception) were explained: *arthaavagraha* and *vyanjanavagraha*. Of these, *arthaavagraha* occurs through all five senses and the mind, which are six in total. But *vyanjanavagraha* does not occur through the eye and mind, which are two. This is the meaning of this sutra. The commentary written to explain why *vyanjanavagraha* does not occur through the eye and mind states that these two are *apraapyakari*, meaning they do not perceive the object by touching it. Therefore, *vyanjanavagraha* does not occur through them. From this, it is automatically inferred that *vyanjanavagraha* occurs only for an acquired object, and *arthaavagraha* occurs for both acquired and unacquired objects. It can be said here that if *arthaavagraha* occurs for an unacquired object, there is no obstacle in that. But how can *arthaavagraha* occur for an acquired object? The solution to this doubt is that *vyanjanavagraha* occurs first when an object is acquired, but later, *arthaavagraha* also occurs for it. The eye perceives an acquired object...
1. *Aapraaptika* - A., Di. 1, Di. 21 2 *Yuktas* - Mu., Ta., Na. 3. *Diseṣaṇān* - Mu., Ta., Na. 4. *Praaptamāto nānāyorvy* - Mu., Ta., Na. 5. *Graho'sti* - Mu. 16. *Katham apyavasi* - Mu. 17 *Tāvat puṭṭhe suṇodi saddaṁ apu puṇe parasade rūvaṁ. Phāsaṁ rasaṁ ca gandhaṁ baddhaṁ puṭṭhaṁ vidyāgādi || Yukti* - Mu. A. Ni. Ga. 5. 8. "Jaḍa patta gaṇheja utagga yamañjaṇa - 1" Vi. Bha. Ga. 212 9 'Lo yaṇama patta visayaṁ maṇo vva. - Vi. Bha. Ga. 209

Page #205:
---------------------------
-1120 $ 206] Chapter One
[85 $ 205. It is said that the characteristics and distinctions of *mati-jñāna* have been explained. Now, the characteristics and distinctions of *śruta-jñāna*, which is the object of this discussion, should be explained. Therefore, it is said:
*Śruta-jñāna* is preceded by *mati-jñāna*, and it is of two, many, and twelve kinds. ||20||
8 206. The word "śruta" is primarily derived from the meaning of "hearing," but due to convention, it also refers to a particular kind of knowledge. Just as the word "kuśala" is derived from the meaning of "piercing with a kuśa," but due to convention, it refers to "paryavādāt" (i.e., pure or pleasing). What is this particular kind of knowledge? Therefore, it is said, "Śrutaṃ mati-pūrvam." That which fulfills the proof of *śruta*. According to this derivation, "pūrvam," "nimitta," and "kāraṇa" are synonymous. The explanation of *mati* has already been given. *Mati* which is the "pūrvam" (i.e., the cause) of this is called *mati-pūrvam*, which means "caused by *mati*." The implication is that *śruta-jñāna* is that which arises from *mati-jñāna*.
Doubt: If *śruta-jñāna* is preceded by *mati-jñāna*, then *śruta-jñāna* also becomes *mati-ātmaka* (i.e., of the nature of *mati*), because in the world, the effect is seen to be similar to the cause.
Resolution: This is not an absolute rule that the effect is similar to the cause. Although a pot is produced from a stick, etc., it is not *daṇḍādya-ātmaka* (i.e., of the nature of a stick, etc.). Secondly, even in the presence of *mati-jñāna*, *śruta-jñāna* does not occur. Although *mati-jñāna* is present and the external cause of *śruta-jñāna* is also present, *śruta-jñāna* does not occur in one who has a strong *śruta-jñāna-āvaraṇa* (i.e., obscuration of *śruta-jñāna*). But when the *śruta-jñāna-āvaraṇa* karma is significantly reduced or eliminated, then *śruta-jñāna* arises. Therefore, *mati-jñāna* should be understood as merely the cause of the origin of *śruta-jñāna*. 1. *Pratītyā vyu-mu.* 2. "Avadātaṃ tu vimale manojñā" - A. Na. 4, 96. 3. "Puvvaṃ pūraṇa-gālaṇa-bhāva-o jaṃ mai." - Vi. Bhā. Gā. 1051

Page #206:
---------------------------
## 86] Sarvarthasiddhi

[1120 8 2076 207. It is said that Shruta-jnana (knowledge derived from scriptures) is without beginning and end. If it is considered to be preceded by Mati-jnana (knowledge based on reasoning), then it would not be without beginning and end, because what has a beginning must have an end. Therefore, it is argued that Shruta-jnana is not authentic because it is a product of human effort. This is not a valid objection, because Shruta-jnana is considered to be without beginning and end based on the general principle of Dravya (substance) etc. It is not created by any human being at any time or in any way. Its beginning and end are possible only in relation to specific principles of Dravya etc., hence it is said to be "preceded by Mati-jnana". Just as a sprout arises from a seed, it is without beginning and end in relation to its lineage. Moreover, being non-human in origin is not a reason for authenticity, because if it were, then the teachings of thieves etc., whose creators are not remembered, would also be considered authentic. And what is the contradiction in accepting the authenticity of Pratyaksha (direct perception) etc., which are impermanent?

$ 208. It is argued that the statement "Shruta-jnana is preceded by Mati-jnana" is not applicable in the case of the simultaneous emergence of Samyak-tva (right faith) and knowledge. This is not correct, because Samyak-tva is not the cause of knowledge. The attainment of the Self is gradual, therefore there is no contradiction in the statement "Shruta-jnana is preceded by Mati-jnana".

$ 209. It is argued that the definition "Shruta-jnana is preceded by Mati-jnana" is not comprehensive, because Shruta-jnana can also be preceded by Shruta-jnana. For example, a being hears the sound of words, which are composed of Pudgala-skandhas (aggregates of matter), and through the ear-sense organ, it acquires knowledge of the words. Subsequently, it acquires knowledge of a pot, which is the first Shruta-jnana. If it has a connection with the pot, then after this knowledge of the pot, it acquires knowledge of other actions like holding water, etc., and then Shruta-jnana arises from Shruta-jnana. Or, a being perceives the objects of the eye-sense organ etc. 1. -Shrutakartva-mu. 2. 'Naana-naana-ni ya samkalaai jao maisuyaai. To na suyam maippavva madanaane va suyannaanam'-vi-bha. ga. 107. 3. 'Ihaladdhi maisuyaai samkalaai na tuvaogo si. Maipuvva suyam iha pun suoopaogo maippabhavo. -vi. bha. ga. 108. 4. Padavyakhyaadi-aa., di. 1. 5. Sangati mu. 6. Sambandhantran-ta., na.

Page #207:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

[87 It is sometimes said that knowledge is also a type of faith, because it is preceded by faith.
8 210. The word "Bhed" (difference) is to be understood in conjunction with each of the words "two", "many", and "twelve". There are two types of knowledge: Anga-Bahya (external to the Angas) and Anga-Pravesht (internal to the Angas). Anga-Bahya has many types, such as Dasha-Vakalika, Uttara-Adhyayana, etc. Anga-Pravesht has twelve types. These are: Achar, Sutra-Krit, Sthan, Samavay, Vyakhyan-Prajnapti, Jnatri-Dharma-Katha, Upasaka-Adhyayana, Antakrid-Dasha, Anuttaraupapaddhika-Dasha, Prashna-Vyakaran, Vipaka-Sutra, and Drishti-Vad. Drishti-Vad has five types: Pari-Karma, Sutra, Prathama-Anuyog, Purva-Gat, and Chulika. Of these, Purva-Gat has fourteen types: Utpad-Purva, Agrayaniya, Virya-Anu-Vad, Asti-Nasthi-Pravad, Gyan-Pravad, Satya-Pravad, Atma-Pravad, Karma-Pravad, Pratyakhyan-Namadhey, Vidya-Anu-Vad, Kalyan-Namadhey, Pran-Avyay, Kriya-Vishal, and Lok-Bin-Dusar. Thus, this knowledge is of two types, many types, and twelve types.
8 211. What is the reason for this difference? The difference is due to the difference in the speaker. There are three types of speakers: Sarvagya (omniscient) Tirthankara, or a general Kevali, and Shruta-Kevali, and Araatiya. Of these, the supreme sage, Sarvagya, is endowed with the special excellence of the supreme and inconceivable Kevala-Gyan. Therefore, he has taught the Agam in the form of meaning. He is a direct witness and free from defects, therefore he is authoritative. His direct disciples, the Ganadharas, who are endowed with extraordinary intellectual powers, are Shruta-Kevalis, and they have composed the Angas and the Purva-Granthas by remembering the Agam in its meaning form. They are authoritative because of the authority of the Sarvagya. The Araatiya Acharayas, due to the defect of time, have a shortened lifespan, and they have composed the Dasha-Vakalika, etc., for the benefit of their disciples who have limited intellect and strength. Their authority is based on the fact that they are the same as the original, like milk from the ocean taken in a pot. 
After that, he had the first knowledge of smoke, etc. If he has knowledge of the relationship between smoke, etc., and fire, etc., then he knows fire, etc., from the cause of smoke, etc., and even then, knowledge arises from knowledge. Therefore, isn't it true that knowledge arises only after faith?
Solution: This is not a defect, because where knowledge arises from knowledge, the first knowledge is considered to be faith by convention. Knowledge is also sometimes considered to be faith by convention, because it is a rule that knowledge arises from faith.
8 210. The word "Bhed" (difference) that appears in the Sutra should be combined with each of the words "two", "many", and "twelve". For example, two types, many types, and twelve types. There are two types of knowledge: Anga-Bahya (external to the Angas) and Anga-Pravesht (internal to the Angas). Anga-Bahya has many types, such as Dasha-Vakalika, Uttara-Adhyayana, etc. Anga-Pravesht has twelve types. These are: Achar, Sutra-Krit, Sthan, Samavay, Vyakhyan-Prajnapti, Jnatri-Dharma-Katha, Upasaka-Adhyayana, Antakrid-Dasha, Anuttaraupapaddhika-Dasha, Prashna-Vyakaran, Vipaka-Sutra, and Drishti-Vad. Drishti-Vad has five types: Pari-Karma, Sutra, Prathama-Anuyog, Purva-Gat, and Chulika. Of these, Purva-Gat has fourteen types: Utpad-Purva, Agrayaniya, Virya-Anu-Vad, Asti-Nasthi-Pravad, Gyan-Pravad, Satya-Pravad, Atma-Pravad, Karma-Pravad, Pratyakhyan-Namadhey, Vidya-Anu-Vad, Kalyan-Namadhey, Pran-Avyay, Kriya-Vishal, and Lok-Bin-Dusar. Thus, this knowledge is of two types, many types, and twelve types.
8211. Doubt: What is the reason for this difference? Solution: The difference is due to the difference in the speaker. There are three types of speakers: Sarvagya (omniscient) Tirthankara, or a general Kevali, and Shruta-Kevali, and Araatiya. Of these, the supreme sage, Sarvagya, is endowed with the special excellence of the supreme and inconceivable Kevala-Gyan. Therefore, he has taught the Agam in the form of meaning. He is a direct witness and free from defects, therefore he is authoritative. His direct disciples, the Ganadharas, who are endowed with extraordinary intellectual powers, are Shruta-Kevalis, and they have composed the Angas and the Purva-Granthas by remembering the Agam in its meaning form. They are authoritative because of the authority of the Sarvagya. The Araatiya Acharayas, due to the defect of time, have a shortened lifespan, and they have composed the Dasha-Vakalika, etc., for the benefit of their disciples who have limited intellect and strength. Their authority is based on the fact that they are the same as the original, like milk from the ocean taken in a pot. 
1. -Rest. The difference is made due to the difference in the speaker. A., Di. 1, Di. 2. ]

Page #208:
---------------------------
##  All-Purpose Accomplishment

[11208212
8212. The indirect proof has been explained. Now the direct proof is to be explained. It is of two types - *desh-pratyaksha* and *sarva-pratyaksha*. *Desh-pratyaksha* is of two types - *avadhi-jnana* and *manah-paryaya-jnana*. *Sarva-pratyaksha* is only *kevala-jnana*. If this is so, then the explanation of *avadhi-jnana* mentioned in the beginning of the three types of *pratyaksha* should be given. Therefore, it is said - *avadhi-jnana* is of two types - *bha-pratyaya* and *kshaya-upashama-nimitta*. Among them, the *bha-pratyaya* *avadhi-jnana* is explained in the next verse.
*Bha-pratyaya* *avadhi-jnana* is of the gods and the hell-beings. ॥21॥ 1. -*tyaksha* *sakala-pra* mu.

Page #209:
---------------------------
## Chapter One

[89 F213. "Bhava" is said. What is "Bhava"? "Bhava" is the state of the soul caused by the arising of the karma called "Aayu". "Pratyay", "Karan", and "Nimitta" are synonymous. The "Bhava Pratyay" is the knowledge of the Avadhi, Devas, and Narakas, which is the cause of the "Bhava". If this is so, then the "Kshayopa-shama" does not become the cause of their Avadhi knowledge. This is not a fault, because the "Kshayopa-shama" is achieved through the "Bhava". By taking "Bhava" as the object, "Kshayopa-shama" arises, and thus "Bhava" is considered the main cause. Just as the flight of birds in the sky is caused by "Bhava", not by special education or qualities, similarly, even in the absence of vows, rules, etc., Devas and Narakas have Avadhi knowledge, therefore it is called "Bhava Pratyay". If it is not considered so, then "Bhava" is common to all, and there would be no difference in the Avadhi knowledge of all. But it is said that there is a difference in the intensity of Avadhi knowledge. Even though the term "Devanarakaanaam" is used in a general sense, it only refers to the Samyagdrstis. Why? Because the term "Avadhi" is used. For the Mithyadrstis, it is called "Vibhanggyaan". The intensity of Avadhi knowledge in Devas and Narakas should be known from the scriptures.

214. If "Bhava Pratyay" is the Avadhi knowledge of Devas and Narakas, then what is the "Kshayopa-shama" caused Avadhi knowledge? This is explained further.

Page #210:
---------------------------
The **Sarvarthasiddhi** states that there are six types of **avadhi jnana** (clairvoyance) based on the cause of **kshaya** (destruction of karmas) and **upasama** (sublimation of karmas), which are experienced by the remaining beings, namely humans and animals.  

**[22]** 8215. When the **deshghati spardhakas** (enemies of the country) of **avadhi jnana avarana** (veil of clairvoyance) arise, the **sarvaghati spardhakas** (enemies of all) do not arise, this is **kshaya**. The **sadavastah** (permanent state) of those who have attained **anudaya** (non-arising) is **upasama**. These two are the causes of this, hence **kshayopasama nimitta** (cause of destruction and sublimation). This should be known for the **sesha** (remaining beings). Who are the **sesha**? Humans and animals. Among them, it should be known only for those who have the **samarthyam** (capacity). For those who are **asanjni** (unconscious) and **aparyaptakas** (inadequate), this **samarthyam** does not exist. Even among the **sanjnis** (conscious) and **paryaptakas** (adequate), it does not exist for all. Who then? When the **samyagdarshana** (right faith) and other **nimittas** (causes) are present, those whose **karma** is **shanta** (calm) and **kshina** (diminished) have this **upalabdhi** (perception). Even though **avadhi jnana** is only caused by **kshayopasama**, the term **kshayopasama** is used in the sutra to establish the rule that only **kshayopasama** is the cause, not **bhavam** (becoming). This **avadhi** is of six types, why? Because of the difference between **anugami** (following), **ananugami** (not following), **vardhaman** (increasing), **hiyaman** (decreasing), **avasthita** (stable), and **anavasthita** (unstable). 

Some **avadhi jnana**, like the light of the sun, follows its master. Some **avadhi jnana** does not follow, but like the words of a man who answers a question from a man who has turned away, it is left behind, the man who has turned away does not receive it. Similarly, this **avadhi jnana** is also left behind. Some **avadhi jnana**, like the fire that is born from the churning of wood and grows with the addition of dry leaves, increases from the amount it is born in, due to the presence of **samyagdarshana** and other qualities, until it reaches the capacity to know countless worlds. Some **avadhi jnana**, like the flame of a fire with a limited supply of fuel, decreases from the amount it is born in, due to the increase in **sanklesha parinamas** (results of karmas) caused by the loss of **samyagdarshana** and other qualities, until it reaches the capacity to know only an infinitesimal part of an angula (finger). Some **avadhi jnana**, like a **linga** (sign), remains the same amount it is born in, neither decreasing nor increasing, due to the **avasthana** (state) of **samyagdarshana** and other qualities.

Page #211:
---------------------------
- 1123 8 218j
**Chapter One**

The **avadhi** knowledge arises from the **kevalajnana** (omniscience) or from the increase or decrease of the **samyagdarsana** (right faith) and other qualities. It is produced in a certain quantity and then increases until it reaches the point where it should increase and decreases until it reaches the point where it should decrease, like the waves of water driven by the wind. Thus, there are six types of **avadhi** knowledge.

$ 216. This is how **avadhi** knowledge is explained. Now, **manahparyaya** knowledge should be explained. To explain its characteristics along with its types, the following sutra is said:
_ **Rijuvipulamati** is **manahparyaya** knowledge. ||23|| 8 217. **Riju** means **nirvatita** (fulfilled) and **praguṇa** (virtuous). Question: What is **nirvatita**? Answer: It is fulfilled by the knowledge of the meaning of the words, body, and mind of another person. One whose **mati** (intellect) is **riju** is called **riju-mati**. **Vipula** means **anirvatita** (unfulfilled) and **katilā** (crooked). Question: What is **anirvatita**? Answer: It is unfulfilled by the knowledge of the meaning of the words, body, and mind of another person. One whose **mati** is **vipula** is called **vipula-mati**. **Riju-mati** and **vipula-mati** together are called **rijuvipulamati**. The word **mati** is used only once because it is understood. Alternatively, **riju** and **vipula** can be combined using the **karmadhāraya** compound and then combined with **mati** using the **bahuvrihi** compound. Even then, the word **mati** is not needed again. This **manahparyaya** knowledge is of two types: **riju-mati** and **vipula-mati**.
8218. Question: The types of **manahparyaya** knowledge have been explained. Now, its characteristics should be explained.

Page #212:
---------------------------
92]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[1123 8 218  - The utilization of the self, arising from the connection with another's mind, due to the absence of the obscurations of knowledge, their subsidence, and the support of the anga and upanga karmas, is called **manaḥparyaya** (mental perception). 

**Question:** If it is said that this is **matijñāna** (knowledge of the mind), then what?

**Answer:** The answer to this has been given earlier. Here, there is only an expectation of the mind. It is only expected that the meaning established in another's mind is known by this. 

In this, **ṛjūmati** (straight-minded) **manaḥparyaya** perceives two or three **bhavas** (existences) in the past, and seven or eight **bhavas** in the future, with respect to time. With respect to space, it perceives the extent of a **gavyu** (a measure of distance) in the past, and the interior of a **yojana** (a measure of distance) in the future, not beyond. 

**Vipulmati** (wide-minded) **manaḥparyaya** perceives seven or eight **bhavas** in the past, and countless **bhavas** in the future, with respect to time. With respect to space, it perceives the extent of a **yojana** in the past, and the interior of a **mānuṣottaraśala** (a mountain beyond the human realm) in the future, not beyond.

219. To further explain the difference between these two, the following sūtra is stated:

**viśuddhyāpratipātābhyāṁ tadviśeṣaḥ ||24||**
[The difference between these two is due to purity and non-perception.]

8220. When the obscurations of knowledge and their subsidence are present, there is purity in the self. **Pratipatana** (perception) is **pratipāta** (non-perception). 

**Manaḥparyaya** is the knowledge that arises in the self due to the connection with another's mind, from the subsidence of the obscurations of knowledge and the support of the **anga** and **upanga** karmas. 

**Question:** This knowledge arises from the connection with the mind, so does it become **matijñāna** (knowledge of the mind)?

**Answer:** No, because the answer to this question has been given earlier. That is, here there is only an expectation of the mind. It is only expected that the meaning established in another's mind is known by this. 

Of these, **ṛjūmati** **manaḥparyaya** perceives two or three **bhavas** (existences) in the past, and seven or eight **bhavas** in the future, with respect to time. With respect to space, it perceives the extent of a **gavyu** (a measure of distance) in the past, and the interior of a **yojana** (a measure of distance) in the future, not beyond. 

**Vipulmati** **manaḥparyaya** perceives seven or eight **bhavas** in the past, and countless **bhavas** in the future, with respect to time. With respect to space, it perceives the extent of a **yojana** in the past, and the interior of a **mānuṣottaraśala** (a mountain beyond the human realm) in the future, not beyond.

Page #213:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1
[93

**Non-fall (A-pratipat) and Fall (Pratipat)**

For a being with subdued passions, the peak of restraint (Samyama) falls due to the arising of passions, resulting in a fall (Pratipat). For a being with weakened passions, there is no cause for a fall, hence non-fall (A-pratipat).

**Purity (Vishuddhi) and Non-fall (A-pratipat)**

Purity (Vishuddhi) and non-fall (A-pratipat) are both forms of pure non-fall (Vishuddhi-A-pratipat). There is a difference between these two, which is their specific characteristic (Tadvishesha).

**Purity (Vishuddhi)**

Purity (Vishuddhi) is purer in terms of substance, space, time, and state, with respect to both direct perception (Rjumati) and vast perception (Vipulmati).

**How?**

The final infinite part of the karmic substance, which is the object of omniscience, when further divided infinitely, the final part obtained is the object of direct perception (Rjumati). And when this object of direct perception (Rjumati) is further divided infinitely, the final part obtained is the object of vast perception (Vipulmati). This is because infinity has infinite divisions.

Thus, purity (Vishuddhi) is said to be in terms of substance, space, and time. Purity (Vishuddhi) in terms of state should be understood as being the object of increasingly subtle substances, due to the increasingly refined destruction and pacification of passions.

**Non-fall (A-pratipat)**

Non-fall (A-pratipat) is also distinguished by vast perception (Vipulmati), as it is the rising of the character of its possessors.

**Direct Perception (Rjumati)**

Direct perception (Rjumati) is prone to fall (Pratipati), as it is the rising of the character of its possessors due to the arising of passions.

**Special Note:**

Here, the difference between the two types of knowledge (Manas-paryaya) is shown. Direct perception (Rjumati) is gross knowledge, and vast perception (Vipulmati) is subtle knowledge. This clarifies the difference between them. This is the purified state. This makes a difference in the knowledge of the object in terms of substance, space, time, and state.

However, there is another reason for the difference between these two types of knowledge, which is called fall (Pratipat) and non-fall (A-pratipat). Fall (Pratipat) means to fall, and non-fall (A-pratipat) means not to fall.

It is a rule that vast perception (Vipulmati) is the knowledge of the Manas-paryaya of those who, while being destined for liberation, ascend to the category of destruction (Kshapaka), but there is no such rule for direct perception (Rjumati). It can be the Manas-paryaya of those who are destined for liberation, as well as others. Similarly, it can be the Manas-paryaya of those who ascend to the category of destruction (Kshapaka), as well as those who do not ascend to that category but ascend to the category of pacification (Upashama) or do not ascend at all.

Therefore, direct perception (Rjumati) is considered prone to fall (Pratipati), and vast perception (Vipulmati) is considered non-fall (A-pratipati). This characteristic is due to merit, hence it is mentioned separately.

**§ 221. If this Manas-paryaya knowledge has this distinct difference, then what is the reason for the difference between omniscience (Avadhi) and Manas-paryaya knowledge? Now, to explain this, the next sutra says...**

Page #214:
---------------------------
## 94]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

**[25]**  There is a difference between Avadhi-jnana and Mana-paryaya-jnana in terms of **Vishuddhi**, **Kshetra**, **Swami**, and **Vishaya**.

**[8222]** Vishuddhi means purity. Kshetra is the place where the object of knowledge is located. Swami is the knower. Vishaya is the object of knowledge. Avadhi-jnana is purer than Mana-paryaya-jnana because the object of Avadhi-jnana is more subtle. Kshetra has already been mentioned. Vishaya will be discussed later. Here, we are considering Swami. Mana-paryaya-jnana is found only in those beings who have excellent Charitra-guna, from the stage of Pramatta-samyata to the stage of Kshina-kashya. It arises only in those beings whose Charitra is increasing, not in those whose Charitra is decreasing. Even in those beings whose Charitra is increasing, it arises only in those who have attained one of the seven Riddhis, not in others. Even among those who have attained Riddhis, it arises only in some, not in all. This is the special characteristic of Swami, or the specific Samyama, mentioned in the Sutra. Avadhi-jnana, however, is found in beings of all four Gatis. Therefore, there is a difference between these two types of knowledge even in terms of Swami.

**[8223]** Now is the time to discuss the definition of Kevala-jnana. However, before that, we will examine the Vishaya of different types of knowledge. This is because the definition of Kevala-jnana will be mentioned later in the Sutra: "Kevala is due to the destruction of Moha, Jnanavaran, Darshanavaran, and Antaray." If this is the case, then we should first discuss the Vishaya of Mati-jnana and Shruta-jnana, which were mentioned earlier. Keeping this in mind, the next Sutra says:

**[26]** Mati-jnana and Shruta-jnana are related to all substances, with some exceptions.

**[8224]** The word Nibandha means "connection" or "relation." What is connected? The Vishaya. Should the Vishaya be mentioned in the Sutra? No, it is already implied. Where is it implied? In the phrase "Vishuddhi-Kshetra-Swami-Vishayebhyah." Therefore, based on the meaning of this phrase, there is a difference between Avadhi-jnana and Mana-paryaya-jnana in terms of Vishuddhi, Kshetra, Swami, and Vishaya.

Page #215:
---------------------------
## Chapter One

[95] This chapter deals with the subject of the outcome of devotion. The word "द्रव्येषु" (dravyeṣu) in the plural refers to the collection of all living beings, their virtues and vices, as well as time, space, and matter. The term "असर्वपर्यायेषु" (asarvaparyayeṣu) is used to qualify these substances. These substances, when they become the object of perception and scriptural knowledge, are only attained by a few categories, not by all categories, and not even by infinite categories. Here it is said: The subtle objects like the dharma-āstikāya, etc., are beyond the senses. Perception does not operate on them. Therefore, it is not appropriate to say that perception operates on all substances. This is not a fault; there is a faculty called the "अनिन्द्रिय" (anindriya). Its object is not attained through the senses, but through the cessation of the obscurations of the senses, the calming of the karmas, and the attainment of the fruits. This kind of use, in the form of grasping, etc., arises beforehand. Therefore, the scriptural knowledge that precedes it operates on these objects, which are suitable for it. 8225. Now, what is the object of the knowledge of clairvoyance, which is worthy of infinite description? This is explained in the following sūtra:

"Clairvoyance operates on objects that have form." ||27|| 8226. The term "विषयनिबन्धः" (viṣayanibandhaḥ) is carried over from the previous sūtra. The word "रूपिषु" (rūpiṣu) refers to matter and living beings bound to matter. This sūtra establishes the rule that "clairvoyance operates on objects that have form, not on those that do not." Even though it operates on objects that have form, it does not operate on all their categories, but only on those that are suitable for it. This is why the term "असर्वपर्यायेषु" (asarvaparyayeṣu) is used.

8227. Now, what is the object of the knowledge of mind-reading, which is also worthy of infinite description? This is explained in the following sūtra:

"Mind-reading operates on the infinite parts of the object of clairvoyance." ||28||

Should we do it? Solution: We should not do it, because the term "विषय" (viṣaya) is taken from the context. Question: Where does it appear in the context? Solution: It appears in the sūtra "विशुद्धिक्षेत्रस्वामिविषयेभ्यः" (viśuddhikṣetrasvāmiviṣayeṣu). From there, the term "विषय" (viṣaya) is taken and its case ending is changed according to the meaning. Therefore, it is taken here in the sense of the sixth case ending. The word "द्रव्येषु" (dravyeṣu) in the plural is used to refer to the collection of all substances, including living beings, matter, virtue, vice, space, and time. The term "असर्वपर्यायेषु" (asarvaparyayeṣu) is used to qualify all these substances. All these substances, when they become the object of perception and scriptural knowledge, are only attained by a few categories, not by all categories, and not even by infinite categories. Question: The subtle objects like the dharma-āstikāya, etc., are beyond the senses. Perception does not operate on them. Therefore, it is not appropriate to say that perception operates on all substances. Solution: This is not a fault; there is a faculty called the "अनिन्द्रिय" (anindriya). Its object is not attained through the senses, but through the cessation of the obscurations of the senses, the calming of the karmas, and the attainment of the fruits. This kind of use, in the form of grasping, etc., arises beforehand. Therefore, the scriptural knowledge that precedes it operates on these objects, which are suitable for it.

225. Now, what is the object of the knowledge of clairvoyance, which is worthy of infinite description? This is explained in the following sūtra:

"Clairvoyance operates on objects that have form." ||27||

8226. The term "विषयनिबन्धः" (viṣayanibandhaḥ) is carried over from the previous sūtra. The word "रूपिषु" (rūpiṣu) refers to matter and living beings bound to matter. This sūtra establishes the rule that "clairvoyance operates on objects that have form, not on those that do not." Even though it operates on objects that have form, it does not operate on all their categories, but only on those that are suitable for it. This is why the term "असर्वपर्यायेषु" (asarvaparyayeṣu) is used.

8227. Now, what is the object of the knowledge of mind-reading, which is also worthy of infinite description? This is explained in the following sūtra:

"Mind-reading operates on the infinite parts of the object of clairvoyance." ||28||

1. धर्माकाश-मः. 2. नारूपेष्विति-म.

Page #216:
---------------------------
## 96]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[11288 2288 228. The dravya which is the object of all avadhi jnana, when divided into infinite parts, one part becomes the object of manahparyaya jnana. 8 229. Now, at the end, what is called kevalajnana, what is its object? To this, the sutra says:
Kevalajnana is active in all dravyas and their all paryaya. ||29|| 230. The word "dravya" and "paryaya" are in a dvandva samasa, meaning both are connected. The word "sarva" modifies both, meaning all dravyas and all paryaya. Jiva dravyas are infinite, and pudgala dravyas are even more infinite, differentiated by their anu and skandha. Dharma, adharma, and akasha are three, and kala is innumerable. Their paryaya are also infinite in all three times. There is no dravya or group of paryaya that is beyond the object of kevalajnana. To indicate the infinite greatness of kevalajnana, the sutra says "sarvadravya paryayeṣu".
8 231. It is said that the object of mati etc. is determined. But it is not known how many jnanas are simultaneously present in one atman, due to the arising of vritti from its own cause. 
8 228. The dravya which is the object of all avadhi jnana, when divided into infinite parts, one part becomes the object of manahparyaya jnana.
8 229. Now, at the end, what is called kevalajnana, what is its object? To this, the sutra says:
Kevalajnana is active in all dravyas and their all paryaya. ||29||
6230. The word "dravya" and "paryaya" are in a dvandva samasa, meaning both are connected. The word "sarva" modifies both, meaning all dravyas and all paryaya. Jiva dravyas are infinite, and pudgala dravyas are even more infinite, differentiated by their anu and skandha. Dharma, adharma, and akasha are three, and kala is innumerable. Their paryaya are also infinite in all three times. There is no dravya or group of paryaya that is beyond the object of kevalajnana. To indicate the infinite greatness of kevalajnana, the sutra says "sarvadravya paryayeṣu".
Special Note: Here, in four sutras, the object of all five jnanas is indicated. Mati jnana and shruti jnana are active with the help of five senses and mind, this is clear, therefore their object can only be mati padartha. But mind, through its vikalpa, knows both rupa and arupa padartha, therefore the object of these two jnanas is said to be six dravyas and some of their paryaya. Avadhi jnana, although active without external help, is still kshayopaśamika, therefore its object can only be murta padartha. Therefore, the object of avadhi jnana is said to be rupa padartha. Manahparyaya jnana is also kshayopaśamika, therefore its object is also rupa padartha, but it perceives rupa padartha through the paryaya of mind, therefore its object is said to be an infinite part of the object of avadhi jnana. And kevalajnana is nirvarana, therefore its object is said to be all dravyas and their all paryaya.
8231. The object of mati etc. is determined, but it is not known how many jnanas are simultaneously present in one atman, due to the arising of vritti from its own cause. 
1. Yadupi-Di. 1, Di. 21 2. Bheden bhi -Mu.

Page #217:
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:

The First Chapter
The Divisible Ones are to be Divided Simultaneously in Four [Modes] ॥30॥

232. The word 'Eka' (one) is a numerical term, and the word 'Adi' (first) is a term denoting a part. Those whose first is one are called Ekadini (the first ones). 'Bhajyani' means 'should be divided'. The meaning is that in one atma (self), simultaneously from one knowledge up to four knowledges can arise. For example, if there is one knowledge, then it is Kevalajnana (omniscience). Along with it, other Ksayopasamika (partially destroyed and partially subsided) knowledges cannot simultaneously exist. If there are two, then they are Matijnana (sensory knowledge) and Shrutajnana (scriptural knowledge). If there are three, then they are Matijnana, Shrutajnana, and Avadhijnana (clairvoyance) or Matijnana, Shrutajnana, and Manahparyayajnana (telepathy). And if there are four, then they are Matijnana, Shrutajnana, Avadhijnana, and Manahparyayajnana. There cannot be five simultaneously, because Kevalajnana is independent.

Page #218:
---------------------------
## 98]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[ 11308233
$ 233. Now, it is said that the knowledge of *mati*, etc., is obtained only through the designation of knowledge, or otherwise. To this, it is said: *mati*, *shruta*, and *avadhi* are also *viparaya*. ||31||
$ 234. *Viparaya* means *mithya* (false). Why? Because of the authority of *samyak darshan*. The word 'cha' indicates a collective meaning. Therefore, *mati*, *shruta*, and *avadhi* are also *viparaya* and *samyak* (right). Why are these *viparaya*? Because they are associated with *mithya darshan* in the same way that milk becomes bitter when kept in a bitter gourd with its juice. Now, it is said that the taste of milk changes due to the defect in the base (bitter gourd). But this is not the case with *mati*, *jnana*, etc., in their perception of the object. For, just as *samyak drishti* perceives forms, etc., through the eyes, etc., so also *mithya drishti* perceives forms, etc., through *mati jnana*. Just as *samyak drishti* knows and describes forms, etc., through *shruta*, so also *mithya drishti* knows and describes forms, etc., through *shruta jnana*. Just as *samyak drishti* understands the objects of form through *avadhi jnana*, so also *mithya drishti* understands the objects of form through *vibhang jnana*.
$ 235. To this, it is said:

-
Because of the absence of distinction between the real and the unreal, knowledge becomes ignorance like that of a madman due to random perception. ||32||
$ 236. In the present context, 'sat' means existing and 'asat' means non-existing. Due to the absence of distinction between these two, knowledge becomes ignorance like that of a madman due to random perception. This is the reason why it is said in the present sutra that one soul can have one, two, three, or four types of knowledge at the same time.
8233. Now, to explain whether the knowledge of *mati*, etc., is obtained only through the designation of knowledge, or otherwise, the next sutra is:
*Mati*, *shruta*, and *avadhi* are also *viparaya*. ||31||
$ 234. *Viparaya* means *mithya* (false), because of the authority of *samyak darshan*. The word 'cha' indicates a collective meaning. This means that *mati*, *shruta*, and *avadhi* are also *viparaya* and *samyak* (right). Question: Why are these *viparaya*? Answer: Because they are associated with *mithya darshan* in the same way that milk becomes bitter when kept in a bitter gourd with its juice. It is clear that the taste of milk changes due to the defect in the base (bitter gourd), but this is not the case with *mati*, etc., in their perception of the object. Explanation: Just as *samyak drishti* perceives forms, etc., through the eyes, etc., so also *mithya drishti* perceives forms, etc., through *mati jnana*. Just as *samyak drishti* knows and describes forms, etc., through *shruta*, so also *mithya drishti* knows and describes forms, etc., through *shruta jnana*. Just as *samyak drishti* understands the objects of form through *avadhi jnana*, so also *mithya drishti* understands the objects of form through *vibhang jnana*.
8235. This is a question, and the next sutra provides the answer. Because of the absence of distinction between the real and the unreal, knowledge becomes ignorance like that of a madman due to random perception. ||32||
$ 236. In the present context, 'sat' means existing and 'asat' means non-existing. Due to the absence of distinction between these two, knowledge becomes ignorance like that of a madman due to random perception. This is the reason why it is said in the present sutra that one soul can have one, two, three, or four types of knowledge at the same time.
1. *Viparaya* is false knowledge, which is not based on the true form. Pa. Yo. Su. 1, 8 1 2 - rapi. For example: Di. 1, Di. 2, A. 3. 'Because of the absence of distinction between the real and the unreal, knowledge becomes ignorance like that of a madman due to random perception. The absence of the fruit of knowledge is the ignorance of the wrong-sighted one.' - Vi. Bha. Ga. 115.

Page #219:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

[99]

It happens. Sometimes, one may perceive that form, etc., is real, or that the unreal is real. Sometimes, one may mistakenly conclude that the real is real and the unreal is unreal. This happens due to the rise of false perception. Just as a person with a mind clouded by bile may consider his mother to be his wife and his wife to be his mother. Even if, by chance, he considers his mother to be his mother and his wife to be his wife, that knowledge is not correct knowledge. Similarly, one should understand that there is a misconception about form, etc., in terms of perception, etc. For example, some false perception-induced consequence, residing in the self, generates a misconception about the cause, a misconception about difference and non-difference, and a misconception about the nature itself, even when there is a true perception of form, etc.

237. **Misconception about the cause:** Some believe that there is one cause for form, etc., which is formless and eternal. Others believe that there are atoms of different categories, such as earth, etc., which have four, three, two, and one qualities, respectively, and they are the originators of their respective categories of effects. Others describe that there are four elements, earth, etc., and their physical properties are color, smell, taste, and touch. The combination of these is called a form atom or an octet. Others describe that earth, water, fire, and air are the originators of effects, with atoms of different categories, having qualities like hardness, etc., fluidity, etc., heat, etc., and movement, etc., respectively.

238. **Misconception about difference and non-difference:** The belief that the effect is completely different from the cause or completely non-different from the cause.

239. **Misconception about the nature:** Form, etc., are either without any characteristics, or they do not exist at all, or the knowledge that has transformed into the form of form, etc., is its object, and there is no external object. 

Thus, due to the special characteristics of other misconceptions, which are contrary to what is seen and heard, one accepts things according to one's desires, leading to misconception. Sometimes, one may say that form, etc., exist, even though they do exist. And sometimes, one may say that something that does not exist, exists. Sometimes, one may consider the real to be real and the unreal to be unreal. All these conclusions arise from the rise of false perception. Just as a person with a mind clouded by bile may consider his mother to be his wife and his wife to be his mother. Even if, by chance, he considers his mother to be his mother and his wife to be his wife, that knowledge is not correct knowledge. Similarly, one should understand that there is a misconception about form, etc., in terms of perception, etc. For example, some false perception-induced consequence, residing in the self, generates a misconception about the cause, a misconception about difference and non-difference, and a misconception about the nature itself, even when there is a true perception of form, etc.

Page #220:
---------------------------
## 100] Sarvarthasiddhi

[1132 6 239] Due to the rise of Mithyadarshana, they make assumptions and generate faith in them. From this, there arises Matyajnan, Shrutajnan, and Vibhangajnan. Samyakdarshan, on the other hand, generates faith in the understanding of the true meaning of the Tattvas. From this, there arises Matijnan, Shrutajnan, and Avadhijnan.

8 240. It is said that there are two types of Pramanas. The parts of Pramana are called Nayas. They should be explained after the Pramanas. Therefore, the next Sutra says:

Naigama, Sangraha, Vyavahara, Rijusutra, Shabda, Samabhirudha, and Evambhuta are the seven Nayas. ||33||

8 241. Their general and specific characteristics should be explained. The general characteristic is that the application of a Nay is the one that, without contradiction, leads to the attainment of the true nature of the specific Sadhya, based on the main reason in a multi-faceted object. It is of two types: Dravyarthic and Paryayarthic. Dravya means general, Utsarga, and Anuvritti. The Nay that deals with this is called Dravyarthic Nay. Paryaya means specific, Apavada, and Vyavritti. The Nay that deals with this is called Paryayarthic Nay. The further divisions of these two Nayas are Naigama, etc.

8 242. Now, their specific characteristics are explained: Naigama is the Nay that grasps only the concept in the unmanifested meaning. For example, seeing a man carrying a sword in his hand, another man thinks: 1. -Jnanam Avadhijnan - Mu. 2. -Vanaprayo - Mu.

Page #221:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1

**1133 8 244]**

Someone asks a person going with an axe in hand, "Why are you going?" He replies, "To bring wood." At that time, the word "wood" is not present in the context. The act of going is only based on the intention to bring wood. Similarly, someone asks a person busy collecting fuel and water, "What are you doing?" He replies, "I am cooking rice." At that time, the word "rice" is not present in the context. It is used in the context of the action of cooking rice. This kind of worldly interaction, based only on intention without the actual object being present, is not the domain of the **Naigama Naya**.

**8243.** The **Sangraha Naya** is the principle of taking all things together, without distinction, by considering their commonality despite their differences. For example, "being," "substance," and "pot." When we say "being," it encompasses all things that exist, based on the inference of existence from the signs of speech and knowledge. Similarly, when we say "substance," it encompasses all living and non-living things, including their various categories, based on the etymology of the word "substance" (meaning "that which flows" or "that which is obtained"). Likewise, when we say "pot," it encompasses all pots, based on the inference of their existence from the signs of the concept of a pot and the word "pot." This is another example of the subject matter of the **Sangraha Naya**.

**244.** The **Vyavahara Naya** is the principle of applying the things taken together by the **Sangraha Naya** in a methodical way. What is the method? The method is that the things taken together by the **Sangraha Naya** are applied in their respective order. For example, the **Vyavahara Naya** is used to apply the concept of "being" taken together by the **Sangraha Naya** without considering its specific differences. For example, "what is being is either substance or quality." Similarly, the **Vyavahara Naya** is used to apply the concept of "substance" taken together by the **Sangraha Naya** without considering its specific differences between living and non-living things. For example, "there is living substance and non-living substance." As long as living substance and non-living substance remain the subject matter of the **Sangraha Naya**, they are not considered in their specific differences. 

**1. Sangraha Naya**
**2. Sangraha Naya** (abbreviation)
**2. Sangraha Naya** (abbreviation), **Di. 1**, **Di. 2**, **A.**

Page #222:
---------------------------
## 102] Sarvarthasiddhi

[1133 8 244]  The term "vyavahar" is used based on convention.  Since it is not possible to use "vyavahar" for the collection of both jiva and ajiv, each is considered separately, such as dev, narak, etc. for jiva and ghata, etc. for ajiv. This principle applies until there is no further division possible.

[8 245]  The principle of "Riju Sutra" means to accept what is straight or simple. This principle accepts only the objects of the present time, not the objects of the past or future. This is because the past is destroyed and the future is not yet born, so there is no "vyavahar" for them. The present time is just a moment, and this "Riju Sutra" principle deals only with the objects of that moment.

**Question:**  Doesn't this lead to the disappearance of "vyavahar"?

**Answer:** No, because this principle only shows the object of the principle. "Vyavahar" is achieved by the collective effort of all principles.

[8 246]  The principle of "Shabda Nay" aims to eliminate the errors in ling, sankhya, sadhan, etc.

**Ling Vyabhichar:**  For example, "Pushya, Taraka, Nakshatra" are words with different lingas. Using them together is "Ling Vyabhichar".

**Sankhya Vyabhichar:**  For example, "Jal, Apah, Varsha, Ritu, Amra, Van, Varana, Nagar" are words with singular and plural endings. Using them in a way that violates their singular/plural nature is "Sankhya Vyabhichar".

**Sadhan Vyabhichar:**  For example, "Sena parvatam adhivasati" (The army resides on the mountain). Here, the seventh case ending (for the object of the preposition) is not used, but the second case ending is used, which is "Sadhan Vyabhichar".

**Purusha Vyabhichar:**  For example, "Ehi manye rathena yasyasi, na hi yasyasi, yataste pita" (Come, you think I will go by chariot, you will not go, your father has gone). Here, "manyase" is replaced by "many" and "yasyami" is replaced by "yasyasi", which is "Purusha Vyabhichar".

**Kal Vyabhichar:**  For example, "Vishvadrushva asya putro janita" (Vishvadrushva will be his son). Here, "Vishvadrushva" is used as the subject, and "janita" is used as the verb, which is "Kal Vyabhichar". Or, "Bhavikruti masit" (The future action has happened). Here, the future action is described as having happened, which is "Kal Vyabhichar".

**Upgraha Vyabhichar:**  [This section lists examples of "Upgraha Vyabhichar" with references to specific texts.]

Page #223:
---------------------------
## Chapter 1
[103

**§ 248**
It is believed that the *samābhirūḍha* nay is the one that ascends to multiple meanings. This is because it is established in one meaning, having transcended multiple meanings. For example, the word "cow" is used for various meanings like speech, etc., but it is established in the meaning of "animal." Alternatively, the use of words is for the purpose of conveying meaning. In this case, since one meaning is conveyed by one word, the use of synonyms is pointless. If there is a difference in words, there must be a difference in meaning. Thus, the *samābhirūḍha* nay is the one that ascends to multiple meanings. For example, Indra, Śakra, and Purandara are three words with three meanings. Indra means "possessing authority and power," Śakra means "powerful," and Purandara means "destroyer of cities." Similarly, it should be understood everywhere. Alternatively, the *samābhirūḍha* nay is the one that is established in a particular meaning, having attained it. For example, "Where do you reside?" "In myself." Why? Because there is no existence of one thing in another. If it were so, then knowledge, etc., and forms, etc., would exist in space.

**§ 248**
The *evambhūta* nay is the one that establishes the certainty of a thing in the same way it has been attained. This means that a word is appropriate only at the moment of the outcome of the action it signifies, and not otherwise. For example, when it thunders, it is Indra, not the one who performs the coronation or the one who worships. When it goes, it is as it is - "it stands, it is established, it rests, it stops." Here, due to the prefixes "sam" and "pra," the verb "sthā" is used in the *ātmanepada* form, and due to the prefixes "vi" and "upa," the verb "ram" is used in the *parasmaipada* form. Therefore, this is a violation of the rules of grammar. Although such usage occurs in practice, the *śabdanaya* considers it inappropriate because, from the perspective of the *paryāyārthika* nay, there cannot be a connection between one meaning and another.

**Doubt:** This contradicts the *lokasamaya* (grammar).
**Solution:** If there is a contradiction, let it be. There is no harm in it, because here we are discussing the truth. Medicine does not imitate the desires of a sick man.

Page #224:
---------------------------
## 104]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[1133 § 248
A cow is not standing, nor is it lying down. Alternatively, the self, by the knowledge by which it has transformed, determines itself. Just as the self, transformed by the knowledge of Indra and fire, is Indra and fire.
8249. The Nayas like Naigama etc. have been mentioned. Their order is due to their being progressively more subtle in subject matter, and because the earlier ones are the causes of the later ones. Thus, these Nayas, being progressively opposed in their major subject matter and progressively more favorable in their minor subject matter, become multi-faceted, being divided according to the infinite power of the substance. These Nayas, being primarily based on qualities, are interdependent and are the causes of right vision. They should be understood as being like threads etc., which are invested according to their means, and are independent but incapable of functioning on their own, just as the means of action and the capabilities of the means of action are for the sake of human purposes.
8250. Objection: The simile "like threads etc." is inappropriate in the context, because threads etc., even when independent, do give rise to some function. For example, a single thread is capable of protecting the skin, and a single strong thread is capable of binding. But these Nayas, even when independent, do not give rise to even a little right vision, do they? Solution: This is not a fault, because what has been said has not been understood. This objection has been raised without understanding the meaning that has been said. We have said that the function of cloth etc. is not found in independent threads etc. But what the objector has pointed out is not the function of cloth etc. Objection: Then what is it? Solution: It is only the function of threads etc. The function of threads etc. is also not found in completely independent threads etc., which is the very point of our argument. Now, it is appropriate to use the word "cloth" in the context of threads etc., but not at other times. When one has the power of command and sovereignty, then one is Indra, not when one is being crowned or worshipped. When a cow is walking, then it is a cow, not when it is sitting or sleeping. Alternatively, the way in which, or the knowledge by which, the self has transformed, is the way in which it is determined by that very Naya. For example, the self transformed by the knowledge of the form of Indra is Indra, and the self transformed by the knowledge of the form of fire is fire.
8249. These Nayas like Naigama etc. have been mentioned. Their order is due to their being progressively more subtle in subject matter, and because the earlier ones are the causes of the later ones. Thus, these Nayas, being progressively opposed in their major subject matter and progressively more favorable in their minor subject matter, become multi-faceted, being divided according to the infinite power of the substance. All these Nayas, being primarily based on qualities, are interdependent and are the causes of right vision. They should be understood as being like threads etc., which are invested according to their means, and are independent but incapable of functioning on their own, just as the means of action and the capabilities of the means of action are for the sake of human purposes.
8250. Objection: The simile "like threads etc." is inappropriate in the context, because threads etc., even when independent, do give rise to some function. For example, a single thread is capable of protecting the skin, and a single strong thread is capable of binding. But these Nayas, even when independent, do not give rise to even a little right vision, do they? Solution: This is not a fault, because what has been said has not been understood. This objection has been raised without understanding the meaning that has been said. We have said that the function of cloth etc. is not found in independent threads etc. But what the objector has pointed out is not the function of cloth etc. Objection: Then what is it? Solution: It is only the function of threads etc. The function of threads etc. is also not found in completely independent threads etc., which is the very point of our argument.

Page #225:
---------------------------
-1133 § 250]
It is said that it exists in relation to power. Even in the independent Naya, which is in the form of intellect and expression, there is the existence of the power of transformation into the cause of right vision due to the cause, so there is similarity in the existence of the power. This is the first chapter in the Tattvarthavritti, the explanation of all meanings.
First Chapter
It is not found in the components, so it supports our side. If it is said that the work of cloth etc. in thread etc. is dependent on power, then this should also be known in the case of intellect and expression - words, which are independent Naya. Even in them, such power is found, due to which they are able to transform into the cause of right vision due to the cause, therefore, the analogy is similar to the analogy.

[105
After stating the differences in the proofs of special meanings, the Naya is mentioned here. Naya is a type of Shruta-knowledge, this has already been explained. Here, seven types of Naya are made based on the predominance of the object. The object can be broadly divided into three parts, treatment, meaning and word. The first, Naigama Naya, is both treatment Naya and meaning Naya. Collection, behavior and straight-line are meaning Naya and the remaining three are word Naya. The idea is that the tendency of Naigama Naya is mainly from the treatment, therefore, it is mainly called treatment Naya. However, it is counted in meaning Naya. The tendency of collection, behavior and straight-line is mainly from the meaning, therefore, they are called meaning Naya and the tendency of word, common and similar Naya is mainly from the word, therefore, they are called word Naya. As we have indicated, Naigama Naya is included in meaning Naya, but there is a fundamental difference in considering Naigama Naya as meaning Naya from the rest of the meaning Naya. The point is that it is the work of Naigama Naya to accept the object from the predominance of treatment, not the rest of the meaning Naya, therefore, it is called treatment Naya. The rest of the meaning Naya directly deals with the object from the predominance of difference-in-difference or general-special, there is no special place for treatment there, therefore, we have explained Naigama Naya separately from the meaning Naya. Granted, Naigama Naya also deals with difference-in-difference or general-special in a secondary way, but treatment works at the root of all these, therefore, Naigama Naya is mainly treatment Naya. Siddhasena Divakara did not consider Naigama Naya as Naya, the reason for this is treatment. According to them, it is a question of how much space is given to treatment in the case of right knowledge. There is a big difference between object-touching alternatives and alternatives imposed on the object. It is mandatory to give object-touching alternatives a place in the category of right knowledge, but if alternatives imposed on the object are given a place in the category of right knowledge, then there will be no limit to the state of non-existence, this was a fear, perhaps for this reason, Acharya Siddhasena Divakara did not mention Naigama in the Naya chapter. But such treatment, which is helpful in knowing the correct original work from tradition and which does not cause fear of spreading unrealistic illusions or which does not make the object known in the opposite way but points to the deepest essence of the object, is acceptable, considering this, treatment-dominant Naigama Naya has been given a place in the Naya chapter. This increases the scope of thinking and helps in classifying the overall thoughts that are the generators of right knowledge. If the thoughts that come in the category of Naigama Naya are considered false and completely abandoned - not given a place in the category of right knowledge, then all the thoughts that lead to non-duality should also have the same fate. If they help in analyzing the nature of the object, therefore, they are counted in the category of Naya, then the same thing should be applied to Naigama Naya. The general and special nature of these Naya is given in the commentary.

Page #226:
---------------------------
[106]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[1133 § 250

Therefore, this topic is not elaborated upon here. The **Riju Sutra** **naya** grasps the object through the present **paryaya** by means of the **naya** itself, and the **Shabdadhika** **naya** grasps the object through the present **paryayamukha** by means of words. Therefore, the subject of these **nayas** cannot be duality. This is why, while explaining the subject of **Shabdanaya**, the **vachya** etc. of words ending in singular and dual forms etc. used together with adjectives, special qualities etc. have been declared as not its subject, and while explaining the subject of **Samabhirudha**, the use of multiple meanings of a single word or multiple words for a single meaning has been declared as not its subject, because the **vachya** of a word ending in singular form is different, and the **vachya** of a word ending in dual form is different. Therefore, **Shabdanaya** cannot grasp them in a single **vachya** form. Similarly, the meaning of the word "go" as "cow" is different, and the meaning as "speech" is different. Therefore, **Samabhirudha** **naya** cannot grasp these meanings through a single word. Similarly, the subject of all **nayas** should be understood. **Naya** is an option that touches the object through a part. Like **pramana** knowledge, it does not touch the entire object. Therefore, **Nirapeksha** **naya** is called **mithya** and **Sapeksha** **naya** is called **samyak**. A detailed explanation of this topic and the consideration of the increasing subtlety of all **nayas** has been done in the original text. Thus, it is certain that there are seven **nayas** and they are divided into two parts: **dravyaarthic** and **paryayaarthic**.

Thus ends the first chapter of the **Sarvarthasiddhi** commentary on **Tattvartha**.

Page #227:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

$251.$ It is said that the subject matter of Right Faith (Samyak Darshan) is explained as Jiva (soul) etc. What is the true nature of Jiva, which is mentioned first? It is said that the true nature of Jiva is **Aupaśamika**, **Kṣayika**, **Miśra**, **Audayika**, and **Pāriṇāmika**. ||1||

$252.$ **Aupaśamika** is the cessation of the experience of Karma in the soul due to the cause of its own power. Just as mud settles in water due to the connection with substances like Kataka etc., similarly, the cessation of the experience of Karma in the soul is due to the cause of its own power. **Kṣayika** is the complete cessation of Karma. Just as the mud completely disappears when the water is transferred to another clean vessel, similarly, the complete cessation of Karma from the soul is **Kṣayika**. **Miśra** is the state of both cessation and existence. Just as some mud settles in water due to the connection with substances like Kataka etc., and some remains, similarly, the state of both cessation and existence is **Miśra**. **Audayika** is the attainment of the fruits of Karma due to the cause of substances etc. **Pāriṇāmika** is the transformation that is caused only by the gain of the nature of the substance. **Aupaśamika** is the state whose purpose or cause is cessation. Similarly, **Kṣayika**, **Kṣayopaśamika**, **Audayika**, and **Pāriṇāmika** should be explained as their derivations. These five states are extraordinary, therefore, they are called the true nature of Jiva.

$253.$ Since Right Faith is the subject matter, **Aupaśamika** Right Faith is obtained first among its three categories, therefore, it is taken first. After that, **Kṣayika** is taken. Because it is the opposite of **Aupaśamika** and because it is countless times more than the worldly beings in terms of substance, **Kṣayika** is taken after **Aupaśamika**. Then, **Miśra** is taken because it is both **Aupaśamika** and **Kṣayika** and because it is countless times more than both. Because all of them are infinite in their qualities, **Audayika** and **Pāriṇāmika** are taken at the end. Here, the dual designation should be made - **Aupaśamika Kṣayika**.

Page #228:
---------------------------
## 108] Sarvath Siddhau
[2118 253 Mishraudayika Pariṇāmikā iti.  Tathā sati dviḥ 'cha' śabdo na kartavyo bhavati.  Naivam śakyam.  Anyaguṇāpekṣayā iti pratīyeta.  Vākye punaḥ sati 'cha' śabdena prakṛtobhāyanukaraṣaḥ kṛto bhavati.  Tahi kṣāyopaśamikagrahaṇameva kartavyam iti cet.  Na; gauravāṭ.  Miśragrahaṇam madhye kriyate ubhayāpekṣārtham.  Bhavyaśya aupaśamikakṣāyiko bhāvau.  Miśraḥ punaḥ abhavyaśyāpi bhavati, auyikapariṇāmikābhyām saha bhavyaśyāpīti.  Bhāvāpekṣayā talliṅsaṅkhyāprasanṅgaḥ svatattvasyeti cet?  Na; upāliṅsaṅkhyatvāṭ.  Tadabhāvastattvam.  Svam tattvam svatattvam iti.
254. Atra āha tasyaikasyātmano ye bhāvā aupamikādayaste kim bhedavanta utābhedā iti.  Atra ucyate, bhedavantaḥ.  Yady evam, bhedā ucyantāmitiyat āha
Dvinavaṣṭādaśaika viṁśatitribhedā yathākramam ||2|| $ 255. Dvayādīnām saṅkhyāśabdānām kṛtadvandvānām bhedasabdena saha svapadārthe 'anyapade' vā vruttiyā 
1. Saṅkhyātvāt-mu. | 2. Trayah.  Ta ekha bhedā: mu. |

Page #229:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[109 to be known. Two, nine, eighteen, twenty-one, and three. These are the divisions, and these are the divisions of those, or the divisions of those who have two, nine, eighteen, twenty-one, and three divisions. When the meaning is in the primary word, then there is a connection with the two, nine, eighteen, twenty-one, and three divisions of the states of the metaphorical, etc. Due to the meaning, the case ending changes. When the meaning is in another word, then only the words ending in the specified case ending are connected, the states of the metaphorical, etc. are two, nine, eighteen, twenty-one, and three divisions. The word "in order" is for understanding the number in order. The metaphorical has two divisions. The destructive has nine divisions. The mixed has eighteen divisions. The arising has twenty-one divisions. The resultant has three divisions.]

8256. If this is so, then what are the two divisions of the metaphorical? To explain this, the next sutra says:

**Right faith and right conduct.** [3]

257. The characteristics of right faith and right conduct have been explained before. Doubt: How is it metaphorical? Answer: There are two divisions of the delusion of conduct: that which is subject to passions and that which is not subject to passions. Of these, the one subject to passions has four divisions: anger, pride, deceit, and greed, which have infinite connections. The delusion of perception has three divisions: right faith, wrong faith, and mixed faith. The metaphorical right faith arises from the pacification of these seven natures.

258. Doubt: How can there be pacification of these when the karmic defilement obtained from the arising of karma of the being who has had wrong faith from beginningless time remains? Answer: Their pacification is due to the cause of time, etc. Now, we explain the obtaining of time: A being who is bound by karma, when the time for the change of half a pudgala remains, becomes fit for the first attainment of right faith, not before. This is one obtaining of time. Another is...

Page #230:
---------------------------
## 110]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[213 § 258
**Kalalabdhi** (Time-gain) of Karma-sthiti (Karma-state). In the case of karmas with **utkrista-sthiti** (superior state) and **jghanya-sthiti** (inferior state), **Prathama-samyaktv** (first right faith) is not attained. Where then is it attained? When the **bandha** (bond) of karmas with **antaḥkoṭikoṭisāgaropamasthiti** (state like an ocean of countless crores) is about to occur, and due to **vishuddha-pariṇāma** (pure result), the karmas in **sat-karma** (good karma) are established in a state of **saṅkhyeya-sāgaropamasahasrāṇāyāma-antaḥkoṭikoṭisāgaropamasthiti** (state like an ocean of countless crores of thousands of oceans of countless crores), then the being becomes eligible for **Prathama-samyaktv**. Another **kalalabdhi** is in relation to **bhavy** (being destined for liberation). A **bhavy** who is **pañcendriya** (five-sensed), **saṅjñī** (conscious), **paryāpta** (sufficient), and **sarvavishuddha** (completely pure) attains **Prathama-samyaktv**. The word "**ādi**" (beginning) includes **jātismaraṇa** (recollection of birth) etc. 8 259. **Aupaśamika** (pacifying) **cāritra** (conduct) arises from the pacification of all **mohaniya** (delusive) karmas. Among these, **samyaktv** is placed first because **cāritra** follows **samyaktv**.
8 260. To explain the different forms of the nine types of **kṣāyika** (destructive) **bhāva** (state), the next sūtra says:
**Kṣāyika** **jñāna**, **kṣāyika** **darśana**, **kṣāyika** **dāna**, **kṣāyika** **lābha**, **kṣāyika** **bhoga**, **kṣāyika** **upabhoga**, **kṣāyika** **vīrya**, **kṣāyika** **samyaktv**, and **kṣāyika** **cāritra** are the nine types of **kṣāyika** **bhāva**. ॥4॥
8261. The word "**ca**" (and) in the sūtra is used to include **samyaktv** and **cāritra**. When **jñāna-āvaraṇa** (knowledge-obscuring karma) is completely destroyed, **kevala-jñāna** (omniscience) is attained. The being becomes eligible for **Prathama-samyaktv** when there is a certain amount of time remaining. It is not attained when there is more time remaining. This is one type of **kalalabdhi**. Another **kalalabdhi** is related to **karma-sthiti**. **Prathama-samyaktv** is not attained when there is a remaining **utkrista-sthiti** karma or a remaining **jghanya-sthiti** karma.
**Doubt:** Then in what state is it attained?
**Solution:** When the **bandha** of karmas with **antaḥkoṭikoṭisāgaropamasthiti** is about to occur, and due to **vishuddha-pariṇāma**, the karmas in **sat-karma** are established in a state of **saṅkhyeya-sāgaropamasahasrāṇāyāma-antaḥkoṭikoṭisāgaropamasthiti**, then the being becomes eligible for **Prathama-samyaktv**. One **kalalabdhi** is in relation to **bhavy**. A **bhavy** who is **pañcendriya**, **saṅjñī**, **paryāpta**, and **sarvavishuddha** attains **Prathama-samyaktv**. The word "**ādi**" includes **jātismaraṇa** etc.
8 259. **Aupaśamika** **cāritra** arises from the pacification of all **mohaniya** karmas. Among these, **samyaktv** is placed first because **cāritra** follows **samyaktv**.
**Special Note:** **Aupaśama** (pacification) is of two types: **karaṇopaśama** (pacification through action) and **akaraṇopaśama** (pacification through inaction). **Karaṇopaśama** is the pacification of karma through its **antarakaraṇa** (internalization). This type of **upaśama** occurs only for **darśana-mohaniya** (delusive karma of perception) and **cāritra-mohaniya** (delusive karma of conduct). Therefore, only two types of **upaśama** are mentioned. However, there is a special point: **ananta-anubandhi** (infinitely connected) **caturṣka** (fourfold karma) does not undergo **antarakaraṇa** **upaśama**. Therefore, wherever the pacification of **ananta-anubandhi** **caturṣka** is mentioned, it should be understood as **anudaya-upaśama** (pacification through non-arising). The **aupaśamika** **samyagdṛṣṭi** (right vision) undergoes **antarakaraṇa** **upaśama** for **darśana-mohaniya**, and **anudaya-upaśama** for **ananta-anubandhi** **caturṣka**. This is the meaning of the statement. In the present context, four qualifications are mentioned to indicate the eligibility of the being who attains **aupaśamika** **samyaktv**. The special point is this: the first qualification is related to the time of **ardha-pudgala-parivartana** (half-pudgala transformation). Only a being who has this much time remaining in **saṃsāra** (cycle of birth and death) can attain **samyagdṛṣṭi** (right vision) for the first time. However, there is no rule that **samyagdṛṣṭi** must be attained when this much time remains. It is certain that **samyagdṛṣṭi** will not be attained before this time.
I
8260. To explain the different forms of the nine types of **kṣāyika** **bhāva**, the next sūtra says:
The nine

Page #231:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

**111. Kṣayika and Kevala-darśana**

Kṣayika abhayadāna is a gift of fearlessness that benefits an infinite number of beings due to the complete destruction of the dāna-antarāya karma. Kṣayika lābha is the benefit that arises from the complete destruction of the lābha-antarāya karma, which allows the Kevalis, free from the act of eating morsels, to constantly receive an infinite number of subtle, supremely auspicious, and extraordinary atoms that strengthen their bodies, which are not common to other humans. Kṣayika bhoga is the infinite and extraordinary enjoyment that arises from the complete destruction of the bhoga-antarāya karma, which manifests as extraordinary events like showers of flowers. Kṣayika upabhoga is the infinite enjoyment that arises from the complete destruction of the upabhoga-antarāya karma, which manifests as extraordinary possessions like thrones, fly whisks, and three umbrellas. Kṣayika vīrya is the infinite strength that arises from the complete destruction of the vīrya-antarāya karma. Kṣayika samyaktva arises from the complete destruction of the seven aforementioned natures. Kṣayika cāritra is similar.

**Doubt:** If kṣayika dāna, etc., are the causes of abhayadāna, etc., then wouldn't these also occur in the Siddhas?

**Resolution:** This is not a fault, because the occurrence of abhayadāna, etc., requires the presence of the śarīra-nāma karma and tīrthankara-nāma karma. Since these karmas are absent in the Siddhas, abhayadāna, etc., do not occur in them.

**Doubt:** How then can kṣayika dāna, etc., be present in the Siddhas?

**Resolution:** Just as the Siddhas possess infinite strength through kevala-jñāna, they possess kṣayika dāna, etc., in the form of supreme bliss and freedom from obstacles.

**Special Note:** There are four types of ghātika karmas: jñāna-āvaraṇa, darśana-āvaraṇa, mohanīya, and antaya. The absence of jñāna-āvaraṇa results in kṣayika jñāna, the absence of darśana-āvaraṇa results in kṣayika darśana, the absence of mohanīya results in kṣayika samyaktva and kṣayika cāritra, and the absence of antaya results in kṣayika dāna, etc. These five are called the five attainments. This is why there are nine types of kṣayika. Although the absence of aghatika karmas manifests kṣayika qualities like aguru, laghu, etc., in the jīva, they are not considered here because they are not anujīvī.

**Question:** In the commentary, it is stated that kṣayika dāna, etc., require the presence of śarīra-nāma karma and tīrthankara-nāma karma. How appropriate is this statement?

**Answer:** This is a cause-and-effect relationship. When a tīrthankara is in the womb, six months before his birth, the gods, out of devotion, come to the city where the tīrthankara will be born and deposit jewels. 

1.  **yasyātyantābhā-mu**
2.  **mānantyavīryāvyābādhsukhārūpe-mu**
3.  **mānantyāvyābādhsukhārūpa ā, di. 1, di. 21**

Page #232:
---------------------------
## 1121 Sarvarthasiddhi
-214 $ 262] 8 262. The eighteen types of *kshayopashamaka* (pacifying of karmas) are explained in the following sutra, for the purpose of elucidating their distinctions:
There are four types of *jnana* (knowledge), three types of *ajnana* (ignorance), three types of *darshan* (perception), and five types of *labdhi* (attainments) such as *dana* (charity), *samyaktv* (right faith), *charitra* (right conduct), and *samyama-asamyama* (control and lack of control). ||5||
6 263. There are four, three, three, and five types. Those with four, three, three, and five types are called so. The word "yathkramam" (in order) is understood here, which connects the four, three, three, and five with *jnana* (knowledge) etc. in order. Thus, there are four types of *jnana* (knowledge), three types of *ajnana* (ignorance), three types of *darshan* (perception), and five types of *labdhi* (attainments).

Page #233:
---------------------------
## Chapter One

**[215 8 263]**

The state of *kshaya-upashama* (diminution and pacification) arises when the *desha-ghati* (destructive) *spardhakas* (competitors) arise due to the diminution and pacification of the *anantanu-bandhi* (infinitely connected) *kshayas* (passions). Here, the functioning of *jnana* (knowledge) etc. should be explained in terms of the diminution and pacification of their respective *avaranas* (coverings) and *antarayas* (obstacles). The term *samyak-tva* (rightness) refers to *vedaka* (knowing) *samyak-tva*. 

*Samyak-tva* becomes *kshaya-upashama* when the four *anantanu-bandhi* *kshayas*, *mithyatva* (falsehood) and *samyag-mithyatva* (partially true falsehood), arise and diminish, and their pacification leads to the rise of the *desha-ghati* *spardhaka* *samyak-tva*.

*Charitra* (conduct) becomes *kshaya-upashama* when the twelve *kshayas* of the *anantanu-bandhi*, *apratyakhyana-avaran* (non-rejection covering) and *pratyakhyana-avaran* (rejection covering) arise and diminish, and their pacification leads to the rise of one of the four *sanjvalana* (burning) *kshayas* as a *desha-ghati* *spardhaka*, and the nine *no-kshayas* (non-passions) arise as much as possible, resulting in the cessation of the cycle of rebirth.

*Samyama-asamyama* (control and lack of control) becomes *kshaya-upashama* when the eight *kshayas* of the *anantanu-bandhi* and *apratyakhyana-avaran* arise and diminish, and their pacification leads to the rise of the *pratyakhyana-avaran* *kshaya* and one of the *sanjvalana* *kshayas* as a *desha-ghati* *spardhaka*, and the nine *no-kshayas* arise as much as possible, resulting in the cessation or non-cessation of the cycle of rebirth.

**Labdhis (Attainments)**

In the present time, the *kshaya-upashama* state arises when the *desha-ghati* *spardhakas* are diminishing, and their pacification is expected in the future, while the *desha-ghati* *spardhakas* continue to arise.

It should be understood that the aforementioned states arise due to the diminution and pacification of their respective *avaranas* and *antarayas*. The term *samyak-tva* in the sutra refers to *vedaka* *samyak-tva*.

The meaning is that when the four *anantanu-bandhi* *kshayas*, *mithyatva* and *samyag-mithyatva*, arise and diminish, and their pacification leads to the rise of the *desha-ghati* *spardhaka* *samyak-tva*, the resulting *tattva-artha-shraddha* (faith in the true meaning) is *kshaya-upashama* *samyak-tva*.

When the twelve *kshayas* of the *anantanu-bandhi*, *apratyakhyana-avaran* and *pratyakhyana-avaran* arise and diminish, and their pacification leads to the rise of one of the four *sanjvalana* *kshayas* as a *desha-ghati* *spardhaka*, and the nine *no-kshayas* arise as much as possible, the resulting cessation of the cycle of rebirth is *kshaya-upashama* *charitra*.

When the eight *kshayas* of the *anantanu-bandhi* and *apratyakhyana-avaran* arise and diminish, and their pacification leads to the rise of the *pratyakhyana-avaran* *kshaya* and one of the *sanjvalana* *kshayas* as a *desha-ghati* *spardhaka*, and the nine *no-kshayas* arise as much as possible, the resulting cessation or non-cessation of the cycle of rebirth is called *samyama-asamyama*.

**Special Meaning**

The *kshaya-upashama* state is characterized by the diminishing of the *sarva-ghati* (all-destructive) *spardhakas* in the present time, their pacification expected in the future, and the continued rise of the *desha-ghati* *spardhakas*.

It is certain that most *desha-ghati* *karmas* (actions) contain both *desha-ghati* and *sarva-ghati* *spardhakas*. Only the nine *no-kshayas* and *samyak* *prakriti* (right nature) are exceptions, containing only *desha-ghati* *spardhakas*. Therefore, *kshaya-upashama* is possible for all *desha-ghati* *karmas* except the nine *no-kshayas*, because *kshaya-upashama* requires both types of *karmas* as per the aforementioned characteristics.

*Samyak* *prakriti* acts as a catalyst in the creation of the *kshaya-upashama* state, arising from *mithyatva* and *samyag-mithyatva*. Therefore, there are a total of eighteen types of *kshaya-upashama* states. For example, there are four *desha-ghati* *prakritis* of *jnana-avaran* (knowledge covering), and their *kshaya-upashama* leads to the manifestation of four types of *jnana*. However, there are three types of *ajnana* (ignorance) due to *mithyatva* and four types of *jnana* due to *samyag-drishti* (right vision), resulting in a total of seven types of *kshaya-upashama* *jnana*. These seven types of *jnana* are included in the eighteen *kshaya-upashama* states.

It is clear that there are three types of *darshan* (perception) and five types of *labdhi* (attainment) in the *kshaya-upashama* state. The remaining three states are *vedaka* *samyak-tva*,

Page #234:
---------------------------
## 114] Sarvarthasiddhi
[216 8 264 _$264. The twenty-one types of *audayika* (arising) states have been mentioned. To explain their distinctions, this sutra is uttered. There are four types of *gati* (paths), four types of *kṣaya* (passions), three types of *linga* (gender), one type of *mithyādarśana* (false belief), one type of *ajñāna* (ignorance), one type of *asanyama* (non-restraint), one type of *asiddha* (unrealized), and six types of *leśyā* (tendencies). ||6||
$ 265. The word 'yathākramam' (in order) is understood here, as it is relevant. There are four types of *gati*: *narakagati* (hellish path), *tiryag* *gati* (animal path), *manuṣya* *gati* (human path), and *devagati* (divine path). Among these, *narakagati* is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* (action) called *nāmakarma* (name-karma) which leads to the state of hell. Similarly, the other three *gati*s should be understood. There are four types of *kṣaya*: *krodha* (anger), *māna* (pride), *māyā* (deceit), and *lobha* (greed). Among these, *krodha* is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* that produces anger. Similarly, the other three *kṣaya*s should be understood as *audayika*. There are three types of *linga*: *strīveda* (female gender), *pumveda* (male gender), and *napumsakaved* (neuter gender). *Strīveda* is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* that produces the female gender. Similarly, the other two genders are *audayika*. There is one type of *mithyādarśana*. *Mithyādarśana* is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* that produces the result of disbelief in the true nature of things. *Ajñāna* (ignorance) is the lack of knowledge of objects. It is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* called *jñānavaraṇa* (knowledge-obscuring karma). *Asanyata* (non-restraint) arises from the *karma* called *cāritramohaniya* (character-delusive karma) which is a *sarvaghati* (all-destructive) *spardhaka* (competitor). Therefore, it is *audayika*. *Asiddha* (unrealized) arises from the general *karma* of *karma* *udaya* (arising). Therefore, it is *audayika*. There are two types of *leśyā*: *dravya* *leśyā* (substance tendency) and *bhāva* *leśyā* (state tendency). Here, *dravya* *leśyā* is not considered because the *jīva* (soul) has the authority over its states. *Bhāva* *leśyā* is said to be *audayika* because it is colored by the arising of *kṣaya* and is the tendency towards *yoga* (liberation). In the present time, there is no arising, so their arising takes place before the time of their arising in the form of *spardhaka*s (competitors) or *prakṛti*s (natures) that are present in the *stik* (state) of transition. This is called *udayābhāvi* *kṣaya* (non-arising decay) in *prakṛti*. Here, the non-arising from the nature itself is intended as decay. And these *sarvaghati* *spardhaka*s and *prakṛti*s, which are capable of arising in the future, remain in the form of *upasama* (subdued) in their *sadavastha* (true state). This means that they exist in reality. The *udayavali* (arising series) does not cause the *udīraṇa* (excitation) of those *niṣeka*s (restrictions) above. Only through the transition in the *stik* in the *udayavali*, their transition takes place before the time of their arising in the form of *sa-jātiya* (same-kind) *deśaghati* (country-destroying) *prakṛti* or *spardhaka*. The meaning of this is that the *jīva*’s own nature comes to light due to the non-arising and non-excitation of the *sarvaghati* *aṁśa* (all-destructive part), and the *deśaghati* *aṁśa* (country-destroying part) brings about *sadōṣata* (imperfection) in it due to its arising.
264. Now, to explain the distinctions of the twenty-one types of *audayika* states that have been mentioned, the next sutra is uttered.
There are twenty-one types of *audayika* states: four *gati*s, four *kṣaya*s, three *linga*s, one *mithyādarśana*, one *ajñāna*, one *asanyama*, one *asiddha* state, and six *leśyā*s. ||6||
8265. The word 'yathākramam' (in order) is understood in this sutra, because it is relevant here. There are four types of *gati*: *narakagati* (hellish path), *tiryag* *gati* (animal path), *manuṣya* *gati* (human path), and *devagati* (divine path). Among these, *narakagati* is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* called *nāmakarma* (name-karma) which leads to the state of hell. Similarly, the meaning of the other three *gati*s should be understood. There are four types of *kṣaya*: *krodha* (anger), *māna* (pride), *māyā* (deceit), and *lobha* (greed). Among these, *krodha* is *audayika* because it arises from the *karma* that produces anger. Similarly, the other three *kṣaya*s should be understood as *audayika*. There are three types of *linga*:

Page #235:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[115] There are six types of *leshyas*: *krishna-leshya*, *nila-leshya*, *kapota-leshya*, *tejo-leshya*, *padma-leshya*, and *shukla-leshya*.

[8266] It is said in the scriptures that *shukla-leshya* exists in the *upashanta-kashya*, *kshina-kashya*, and *sayoga-kevali* stages. But in these stages, there is no arising of *kashyas*, so how can there be *audayika* (arising from *karma*) *leshyas*? This is not a fault. Because of the *purva-bhava-prajnapan* *naya* (principle of knowing the previous state), the *leshyas* in the *upashanta-kashya* etc. stages are considered *audayika* because they are influenced by the arising of *kashyas* in the previous stages. Since there is no arising of *kashyas* in the *ayoga-kevali* stage, it is certain that they are *leshya-rahita* (without *leshyas*).

[8267] The *parinamika* (resulting from *karma*) state has three divisions. To explain the nature of these divisions, the next sutra says:

"There are three divisions of the *parinamika* state: *jivattva*, *bhavya*, and *abhavya*." [7]

[8268] *Jivattva*, *bhavya*, and *abhavya* are three *parinamika* states that do not exist in other substances. Therefore, they should be understood as belonging to the soul. 

Question: Why are these *parinamika*?

Answer: These three states are dependent on the arising, subsidence, destruction, and destruction-subsidence of *karma*. Therefore, they are *parinamika*.

*Jivattva* is dependent on: 1. *Pana-peksha* (the principle of knowing the previous state), 2. *Di. 1* (the first *dravya* - soul), and 3. *Di. 2* (the second *dravya* - *karma*).

Page #236:
---------------------------
## 116] Sarvarthasiddhi

[217 8 268] There are three Pariṇāmika (transformational) states of the Jiva (soul).
[8 269]  It may be argued that states like Astitva (existence), Nityatva (eternality), and Pradeshavatva (having a spatial dimension) are also Pariṇāmika, and should be included here. This is not necessary, as they are already included. How? Because the word "cha" (and) in the sutra indicates their inclusion. 
If this is the case, then the number "three" becomes contradictory, as there would be more than three Pariṇāmika states. This is not a contradiction, as there are only three *specific* Pariṇāmika states of the Jiva. Astitva, etc., are *general* states, applicable to both Jiva and Ajiva (non-soul), and are therefore separately included by the word "cha". 

It may be argued that states like Aupashmika (secondary) cannot exist, as the Atman (soul) is amurta (formless). These states are dependent on Karma-bandha (bondage of karma), and an amurta Atman cannot be bound by karma. This is not correct, due to the principle of Anekanta (non-absolutism). It is not absolute that the Atman is only amurta. Due to the influence of Karma-bandha, it can be considered murta (formful) in a relative sense, and amurta in its pure form. 

If this is the case, then the Atman's unity due to the influence of Karma-bandha would lead to the absence of distinction. This is not a flaw, as even though there is unity in terms of bondage, the distinction between the Atman and Karma is recognized due to the difference in their characteristics. As it is said:

"Bandham padi eyattam lakkhanado havi tassa naanattam.
Tamha amuttibhavo yanto hoi jivassa."

This means: "Even though the Atman is one in terms of bondage, it is different in terms of its characteristics. Therefore, the amurta state of the Jiva is Anekanta, existing in one sense and not in another."

**Explanation:**

There are three Pariṇāmika states: Jivatva (being a soul), Bhavyatva (being capable of liberation), and Abhavyatva (being incapable of liberation). 

Jivatva has two aspects: one related to the life-process, and the other related to the quality of Chaitanya (consciousness). The life-process is dependent on Pranas (vital energies), and therefore this aspect of Jivatva is not primary. The primary aspect is the Chaitanya-related Jivatva, which is present in all Jivas equally and is independent of any cause. This is why it is called Pariṇāmika. 

The same understanding applies to Bhavyatva and Abhavyatva, as both are also independent of any cause. Generally, those who have the potential to manifest the three jewels (Samyak Darshan, Samyak Jnana, and Samyak Charitra) are considered Bhavyas.

Page #237:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

8270. If this is so, then let the characteristic be stated by which the difference is established. To this, it is said: **Usage is the characteristic.** || 8 ||
-219 § 273]
8271. Usage is a consequence that arises from both internal and external causes and is an attribute of consciousness. Thus, even though the soul is one in terms of bondage, it is recognized as distinct due to usage. Just as gold and silver are one in terms of bondage, but are different due to their color and other characteristics, so it should be understood in this case. $ 272 To demonstrate this difference, it is said:
[117
**Usage is of two kinds, eight and four.** || 9 ||
8273. That usage is of two kinds: **knowledge-usage** and **perception-usage**. **Knowledge-usage** is of eight kinds: **mati-jnana**, **shruta-jnana**, **avadhi-jnana**, **manas-paryaya-jnana**, **kevala-jnana**, **mati-ajnana**, **shruta-ajnana**, **vibhang-jnana**. **Perception-usage** is of four kinds: **chakshu-darshan**, **achakshu-darshan**, **avadhi-darshan**, **kevala-darshan**. How is the difference between them?

Page #238:
---------------------------
## 118]
**On the attainment of all purposes**
[219 § 273
Due to the difference between the concrete and the abstract. Concrete is knowledge, abstract is perception. These exist in succession in those who have veils. In those who are without veils, they exist simultaneously, even though perception precedes knowledge, because of its superiority. Before the chapter on right knowledge, five types of knowledge-use were explained. Here, due to the acceptance of use, the opposite is also accepted, hence it is said to be eight-fold.
274. With the outcome described above, the use that is common to all souls, the beings who are marked by that use are of two types -
worldly and liberated || 10
And the knowledge of differentiation. There are four types of perception-use - visual perception, non-visual perception, clairvoyance, and omniscience.
Doubt - What is the reason for the difference between these two uses? Solution - The difference between these two uses is due to the difference between the concrete and the abstract. Concrete is knowledge-use and abstract is perception-use. These two exist in succession in those who have veils and simultaneously in those who are without veils. Although perception comes first, knowledge is placed before perception in the sutra because of its superiority. Due to the chapter on right knowledge, five types of knowledge-use were explained earlier. But here, due to the acceptance of use, the opposite is also accepted, hence it is said to be eight-fold.
Special meaning - Here, the characteristic of the being is explained as use, and its divisions are enumerated. The main divisions of use are two - knowledge-use and perception-use. Both types of use are found in all beings. There are many sub-divisions of these, which arise due to specific causes. The sub-divisions of knowledge-veil and perception-veil, their respective destruction and cessation, destruction, and the arising of perception-delusion, these are the main causes. Due to these, both types of use are divided into twelve divisions. In this way, eight divisions of knowledge-use and four divisions of perception-use are obtained. Mainly, a worldly being has one use at a time, and a liberated being has two uses. But when considering various beings, they are twelve. Although in the first chapter, four types of knowledge were mentioned for one being at a time, and for one who has four types of knowledge at the same time, three types of perception will also be found at that time, but this statement should be understood as being based on the predominance of destruction and cessation. In one being at a time, the destruction and cessation of four knowledge-veils like knowledge-veil, etc., and three perception-veils like visual perception-veil, etc., these seven karmas can occur, but in reality, their use at that time will be only one. Destruction and cessation are the cause of the arising of knowledge and perception, and use is the tendency of knowledge and perception. In a being, the stream of knowledge and perception qualities is constantly flowing. At the time when it receives an external or internal cause, it starts working accordingly. It is certain that in the worldly state, it remains impure, more impure, and most impure, and upon attaining liberation, it becomes pure, then external and internal causes are not required for its tendency." This is the reason why the characteristic of the being is called use here.
8 274. The beings who are marked by all uses, which are indicated by the outcome of the soul-transformation that was explained earlier, which is common to all souls, are of two types, this is what the next sutra says -

There are two types of beings - worldly and liberated || 
1. विष उच्यते दि. 2, मु. 1

Page #239:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[119]

8275. Samsarana is called Samsara, which means transformation. This is present in all beings who are Samsarin. This transformation is of five types: Dravya Parivartan, Kshetra Parivartan, Kala Parivartan, Bhav Parivartan, and Bhav Parivartan. Of these, Dravya Parivartan is of two types: Nokarma Dravya Parivartan and Karma Dravya Parivartan. 

Nokarma Dravya Parivartan is defined as follows: A single Jiva, at a particular time, takes in Pudgalas suitable for the three bodies and six Paryaptis. These Pudgalas, depending on their Snigdha, Rooksha, Varna, Gandha, etc., and their Tivra, Mand, and Madhyama Bhav, remain in their respective states and are then discarded in the subsequent times. After this, the Jiva takes in and discards the Agrihit Pudgalas for an infinite number of times, then the Mishra Pudgalas for an infinite number of times, and finally the Hit Pudgalas for an infinite number of times. Then, the same Pudgalas, in the same way, become the Nokarma Bhav of the same Jiva. This entire process is called Nokarma Dravya Parivartan.

Karma Dravya Parivartan is defined as follows: A single Jiva, at a particular time, takes in Pudgalas through the eight types of Karma Bhav. These Pudgalas are discarded after one Avali, in the subsequent times. Then, following the same process as described for Nokarma Dravya Parivartan, these same Pudgalas, in the same way, become the Karma Bhav of the same Jiva. This entire process is called Karma Dravya Parivartan. It is said:

"All Pudgalas are consumed and discarded by the Jiva. And thus, the Jiva keeps revolving in the Samsara of Pudgala Parivartan."

8276. Kshetra Parivartan is defined as follows: A very subtle Nigoda Jiva, with insufficient Paryapti, having a body in the lowest region of space, is born in the eighth Madhya Pradesh of the Lok, taking the Madhya Pradesh of his body as his own. He lives for the duration of a Ksudra Bhav and then dies. Then, the same Jiva is born again in the same place, then a third time, then a fourth time, and so on, until he has been born in all the regions of space that are as large as an immeasurable fraction of an Angula.

Page #240:
---------------------------
[120] Sarvarthasiddhi
[2110 8 278] There, after being born, the entire universe is brought to the state of being the birth-field of the self, by increasing the extent of each region, until there is a change of field. It is said:
_"There is no region in the entire universe where this being has not been born, repeatedly, with the intention of liberation. Thus, this being has wandered many times in the field of the universe."_ 8277. The change of time is called: A being born in the first time of the Utsarpini, dies at the end of his lifespan. The same being is born again in the second time of the Utsarpini, and dies at the end of his lifespan. The same being is born again in the third time of the Utsarpini. In this way, the Utsarpini is completed. Similarly, the Avasarpini. Thus, the continuity of birth is stated. The continuity of death is also to be understood in the same way. This is the change of time. It is said:
_"In the times of the Utsarpini and Avasarpini, without any exception, this being has been born and died many times, wandering in the time-universe."_ 8278. The change of existence is called: In the hell-realm, the most inferior lifespan is ten thousand years. A being born there with that lifespan, after wandering, is born again with the same lifespan. Thus, for as many times as there are ten thousand years, he is born and dies. Then, increasing the lifespan by one time each, he completes thirty-three oceans of lifespan. Then, he is born in the animal realm with a lifespan of an antarmukhurta. In the same way, he completes three palya-upamas of lifespan in the animal realm. He is born in the human realm with a lifespan of an antarmukhurta. In the same way, he completes three palya-upamas of lifespan in the human realm. And in the heaven realm, he completes a lifespan equal to that of the hell realm. But the heaven 1. Ba. A., A., Ga. 26. 2. Haneṇa bahuso mu., Na. 3. Eva trīti-A., Di. 1, Di. 2. 4. Maraṇam api tathaiva grā-Ta. Maraṇasyāpi tathava grā. Na. 5. Ba. Aṇa, Ga. 271

Page #241:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[121]  And in the human realm, as well as in the realm of the gods, there are hellish states. However, there is a difference:  A being undergoes a **bhavacarita** (cycle of births and deaths) for as long as thirty oceans worth of lifetimes.  As it is said:

"From the lowest hell to the highest heaven, the being wanders repeatedly,
Driven by the delusion of the senses, it experiences many births and deaths."

6279. Now, we speak of **bhavacarita**: A being with five senses, a **paryāptaka** (sufficient) and **mithyātvā** (false belief), attains the most wretched state, the **antaḥkoṭikoṭi** (innermost) state, according to its **jñānāvaraṇa** (veil of knowledge) nature.  For this being, there are countless **kṣayā** (passions) **adhyavasāya** (determinations) states, as many as the number of worlds, which are **ṣaṭsthāna** (six-fold) fallen and suitable for its state.  From these most wretched **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** states, there arise countless **anubhāga** (experiences) **adhyavasāya** states, as many as the number of worlds.  Thus, the being, dwelling in the most wretched state, with the most wretched **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state, and the most wretched **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** state, attains the most wretched **yoga** (state of being) state, suitable for it.  For these states of **kṣayā** and **anubhāga**, there is a second **yoga** state, with an increase of countless parts.  And so, in the third, fourth, and subsequent states, there are **yoga** states, as many as the countless parts of a **śreṇi** (series).  Then, for the being that maintains the same state and the same **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state, there is a second **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** state.  Its **yoga** states should be understood as before.  Similarly, in the third, fourth, and subsequent states, there is this much difference:  Here, one should speak of thirty-one oceans worth of lifetimes.  Thus, all this together constitutes a **bhavacarita**.  As it is said:

"In this life, due to the contact with **mithyātvā**, the being is born in the lowest hell, and in the highest heaven, and wanders repeatedly in the wretched states."

6279. Now, we speak of **bhavacarita**: A being with five senses, a **paryāptaka** (sufficient) and **mithyātvā** (false belief), attains the most wretched state, the **antaḥkoṭikoṭi** (innermost) state, according to its **jñānāvaraṇa** (veil of knowledge) nature.  For this being, there are countless **kṣayā** (passions) **adhyavasāya** (determinations) states, as many as the number of worlds, which are **ṣaṭsthāna** (six-fold) fallen and suitable for its state.  And from these most wretched **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** states, there arise countless **anubhāga** (experiences) **adhyavasāya** states, as many as the number of worlds.  Thus, the being, dwelling in the most wretched state, with the most wretched **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state, and the most wretched **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** state, attains the most wretched **yoga** (state of being) state, suitable for it.  Then, the state, the **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state, and the **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** state remain the same, but the **yoga** state becomes different, with an increase of countless parts.  Similarly, in the third, fourth, and subsequent **yoga** states, one should understand.  These **yoga** states are all **catur-sthāna** (four-fold) fallen, and their number is as many as the countless parts of a **śreṇi** (series).  Then, for the being that maintains the same state and the same **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state, there is a second **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** state.  Its **yoga** states should be understood as before.  The meaning is that here too, the aforementioned three things remain constant, but the **yoga** states are as many as the countless parts of a **jag-śreṇi** (world-series).  Thus, in the third, fourth, and subsequent **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** states, one should understand until there are countless **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** states, as many as the number of worlds.  The meaning is that here, the state and the **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state remain wretched, but the **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** states gradually become countless, as many as the number of worlds, and for each **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** state, there are **yoga** states as many as the countless parts of a **jag-śreṇi** (world-series).  Then, for the being that attains the same state, there is a second **kṣayā** **adhyavasāya** state.  Its **anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** states and **yoga** states should be understood as before.  That is:

1.  And like the animal realm.  (Mū., Tā.)
2.  (Bā., A., Gā.) 28 1
3.  **Anubhāga** **adhyavasāya** (Di.)
4.  In the third, fourth, and subsequent **yoga** states.  (Mū., Tā.)

Page #242:
---------------------------
[122] Sarvarthasiddhi
[2110 8 279~In the Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthanas, there are countless Lokas, and in each Anubhaga Adhyavasaya Sthan, there are countless Yogasthans, as per the Jagashreni. In this way, the increase in the number of Kshaya Adhyavasaya Sthanas should be understood in the third and subsequent Kshaya Adhyavasaya Sthanas. Just as the lowest Kshaya Adhyavasaya Sthanas have been described, so too should the Kshaya Adhyavasaya Sthanas of a higher time period be understood. And in this way, with each increase in time, the Kshaya Adhyavasaya Sthanas of the highest state, which is as vast as thirty Koti Koti Sagaras, should be understood. Ananta Bhaga Vridhi, Asankhya Bhaga Vridhi, Sankhya Bhaga Vridhi, Sankhya Guna Vridhi, Asankhya Guna Vridhi, and Ananta Guna Vridhi - these are the six stages of increase. Similarly, there are six types of decrease. When Ananta Bhaga Vridhi and Ananta Guna Vridhi are removed, there are four stages remaining. In this way, the transformation of all the Mula Prakrutis and their Uttar Prakrutis should be understood. All this together is called Bhava Parivartan. It is said:
3'All beings, due to their association with Mithyatva, have attained the Sthanas of Prakruti, Sthiti, Anubhaga, and Pradeshbandha, and wander in the Bhava Samsara.'
8 280. Those who have renounced the five types of Samsara mentioned above are liberated. The term 'Samsari' is used first in the Sutra because the term 'Mukta' is attained after Samsara.
Special Note: There are two main categories of Jivas - Samsari and Mukta. These categories are based on the bound and unbound states of the Jiva. In reality, these are two states of the Jiva. Initially, the Jiva is in the bound state, hence it is called Samsari. Later, when it becomes liberated, it is called Mukta. The Samsara of the Jiva is relative to the cause, therefore, five categories of Samsara are described based on this relativity - Dravya Samsara, Kshetra Samsara, Kala Samsara, Bhava Samsara, and Bhava Samsara. Their other name is Parivartan. The term Dravya refers to Karma and Anokarma, Kshetra refers to the regions of Lokakasha, Kala refers to the time related to Utsarpini and Avasarpini, Bhava refers to the states of the Jiva like Naraka, etc., and Bhava refers to the Yogas of the Jiva. 1. As before, one Sama-Mu. 2. -Sthanani (as before) Vedi-Mu. 3. Ba. Anu. Ga. 29.

Page #243:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[123
-2112 5 284]

$281.$ The beings who are in the cycle of birth and death are of two types:
Those with mind and those without mind. ||11||

$282.$ Mind is of two types: Dravya-mana and Bhava-mana. Dravya-mana is that which arises due to the ripening of the karma called Pudgala-vipaki, Anga-upanga, and Nama-karma. Bhava-mana is the purification of the soul, which is dependent on the destruction and cessation of the karma called Virya-antaraya, No-indriya-avaran. Those who possess this mind are called Samanaskas. Those who do not possess this mind are called Amanaskas. Thus, beings in the cycle of birth and death are divided into two categories based on the presence or absence of mind: Samanaskas and Amanaskas. The word Samanaskas comes first in the compound word "Samanaskamanaskas" because it is more significant. Why is it more significant? Because Samanaskas are those who contemplate on virtues and vices.

$283.$ To further explain the different categories of beings in the cycle of birth and death, the next sutra states:
Beings in the cycle of birth and death are of two types: Trasas and Sthavaras. ||12||

$284.$ Question: The use of the word "Samsari" (being in the cycle of birth and death) in the sutra is redundant, as it is already established in the context.
Counter-question: Where is it established in the context?
Answer: It is established in the sutra "Samsarinah Muktascha" (Beings in the cycle of birth and death and those who are liberated).
Solution: The use of the word "Samsari" in the sutra is not redundant, as it refers back to the previous sutra. The meaning is that the Samanaskas and Amanaskas mentioned in the previous sutra are beings in the cycle of birth and death. If the word "Samsari" is not considered as a qualifier of the previous sutra, then the words Samanaskas and Amanaskas would be associated with the liberated souls, which is not the case.

And the Kasaya-sthana (the place of passions) is intended here. This explains how the soul keeps wandering in the cycle of birth and death due to these Dravya (matter) and other causes. These transformations take progressively longer and longer. The soul's cycle of birth and death is primarily considered to be until the attainment of Samyag-darshan (right faith). This proves that these transformations occur while the soul is in the state of Mithyatva (false belief). Once Samyag-darshan is attained, even if the soul remains in the cycle of birth and death for a short time, it is freed from these transformations. Complete liberation occurs in the state of Mukti (liberation). This is why the soul is categorized into two types: Samsari (being in the cycle of birth and death) and Mukta (liberated).

$281.$ The beings in the cycle of birth and death mentioned earlier are of two types. The next sutra explains this:
There are beings in the cycle of birth and death who have mind and those who do not have mind. ||11||

$282.$ Mind is of two types: Dravya-mana and Bhava-mana. Dravya-mana is that which arises due to the ripening of the karma called Pudgala-vipaki, Anga-upanga, and Nama-karma. Bhava-mana is the purification of the soul, which is dependent on the destruction and cessation of the karma called Virya-antaraya, No-indriya-avaran. Those who possess this mind are called Samanaskas. Those who do not possess this mind are called Amanaskas. Thus, beings in the cycle of birth and death are divided into two categories based on the presence or absence of mind: Samanaskas and Amanaskas. The word Samanaskas comes first in the compound word "Samanaskamanaskas" because it is more significant. Why is it more significant? Because Samanaskas are those who contemplate on virtues and vices.

$283.$ Now, to further explain the different categories of beings in the cycle of birth and death, the next sutra states:
Beings in the cycle of birth and death are of two types: Trasas and Sthavaras. ||12||

$284.$ Question: The use of the word "Samsari" (being in the cycle of birth and death) in the sutra is redundant, as it is already established in the context.
Counter-question: Where is it established in the context?
Answer: It is established in the sutra "Samsarinah Muktascha" (Beings in the cycle of birth and death and those who are liberated).
Solution: The use of the word "Samsari" in the sutra is not redundant, as it refers back to the previous sutra. The meaning is that the Samanaskas and Amanaskas mentioned in the previous sutra are beings in the cycle of birth and death. If the word "Samsari" is not considered as a qualifier of the previous sutra, then the words Samanaskas and Amanaskas would be associated with the liberated souls, which is not the case.

Page #244:
---------------------------
124) Sarvarthasiddhi
-2112 6 284] And by doing this, the inclusion of 'samsari' at the beginning becomes appropriate. It also serves the purpose of a good answer in relation to the previous sutra. Those samsaris are of two types - trasas and sthavaras. Those who have the rise of the trasanama karma are trasas. Those who have the rise of the sthavaranāma karma are sthavaras. If it is said that 'trasyaanti' means those who move are trasas and those who are stationary are sthavaras, then this is not correct, because it contradicts the Agama. In the Agama, it is stated that from the two-sense beings to the Aayogakevali, all beings are trasas, based on the transformation of the body. Therefore, the distinction between trasas and sthavaras is not based on movement or non-movement, but on the rise of karma. The word 'trasas' is included at the beginning because it has fewer letters than 'sthavaras' and is superior. It is superior because it is possible to find all its uses.
8 285. Since there is much to be said about the one-sense beings, the next sutra is stated to give knowledge of the types of sthavaras, leaving aside the order of the sutras.
Earth-bodied, water-bodied, fire-bodied, air-bodied, and plant-bodied, these are the five sthavaras. ||13||
8 286. Earth-bodied etc. are the types of sthavaranāma karma. Due to their rise, the beings should be known by the names earth etc. Although these names are derived from the roots 'prathan' etc., they are conventional, therefore, there is no expectation of the qualities of 'prathan' etc. in them. The question arises: In the Aarsh, these earth etc. are said to be of four different types, how are these four types obtained? The answer is: Earth, earth-bodied, earth-bodied, and earth-being, these are the four types of earth. Of these, the one which is inanimate, formed by natural transformations, and has the quality of hardness is earth. Although it is inanimate, it is still considered to have the rise of the earth-nama karma because it is recognized by the action of 'prathan'. 1. It becomes. Samsa-Mu. 2. Sanam A., Di. 1, Di. 2, Ta. 3. -rimitta Ami iti Jeeveshu Mu. Na.

Page #245:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[125]  In all three categories of existence, there is the concept of a body. The body is called *pṛthvīkāya* when it is abandoned by a *pṛthvīkāyika* jīva. This *pṛthvīkāya* is like the body of a dead human. A *pṛthvīkāyika* is one who possesses a *pṛthvīkāya*. The soul is bound to this body. A *pṛthvījīva* is one who does not yet possess a *pṛthvīkāya* as a body, as the karma that would give rise to such a body has not yet matured. The same logic applies to the other categories of existence. These five types of beings are stationary.

**Question:** How many *prāṇas* do they have?

**Answer:** They have four *prāṇas*: *sparśaindriyaprāṇa*, *kāyabalaprāṇa*, *ucchvāsa-niḥśvāsa-prāṇa*, and *āyuḥprāṇa*.

8287. Now, to understand who the *trasas* are, the next sūtra states:

**Two-sense beings, etc., are *trasas*.** [14]

8288. A being with two senses is called a *dvīndriya*. The term "etc." indicates a sequence.

**Question:** Where is this sequence explained?

**Answer:** In the scriptures.

**Question:** What is the order?

**Answer:** Two-sense, three-sense, four-sense, and five-sense beings. The term *tadguṇasaviṣṇānavṛttigrahaṇa* implies that two-sense beings are also included.

**Question:** How many *prāṇas* do these beings have?

**Answer:** Two-sense beings have six *prāṇas*, the four mentioned earlier plus *rasanavākaprāṇa*. Three-sense beings have seven *prāṇas*, the six mentioned earlier plus *ghrāṇaprāṇa*. Four-sense beings have eight *prāṇas*, the seven mentioned earlier plus *cakṣuḥprāṇa*. Five-sense beings, if they are *tiryañc* and *asaṁjñī*, have nine *prāṇas*, the eight mentioned earlier plus *śrotraprāṇa*. If they are *saṁjñī*, they have ten *prāṇas*, the nine mentioned earlier plus *manobala*.

1. *Jīva*. It is said: "Earth, *pṛthvīkāya*, *pṛthvīkāyika*, *pṛthvījīva*. The body is taken from the general category and is then abandoned." - *Eva-mu*.

2. "The *bahuvrīhi* compound *tadguṇasaviṣṇānavṛtti*." - *Pari.-śe. p. 4, 4*.

3. *Balādhikāḥ*, *Ā.*., *Di. 1, Di. 21*.

Page #246:
---------------------------
## 126] Sarvathasidau

[21158289$ 289. The next Sutra explains that the number of Indriyas (sense organs) indicated by the word 'Adi' (beginning) needs to be determined.
Five Indriyas (sense organs) are there. ||15|| 8290: The word 'Indriya' has been explained. The word 'Panch' (five) is used to define the number, meaning there are only five and not more. Should the Karmendriyas (organs of action) like hands, feet, etc. be included here? No, they should not be included, because this is a context of use. Here, the organs that are instrumental in use are included, not the organs that are instrumental in action. Also, there is no limit to the organs that are instrumental in action. All the organs and their parts, which are created by the Karma (action) of the body, are instrumental in action. Therefore, there are only five Karmendriyas. 6 291. To show the internal differences of these five Indriyas, the next Sutra says:
They are of two types. ||16|| 8 292. The word 'Vidh' means type. 'Dvividhani' is a Bahuvrihi compound meaning 'those which are of two types'. 
Here, it is explained that there are six Pranas (life forces) in the Dvi-Indriya (two-sense organ) state, seven in the Tri-Indriya (three-sense organ) state, eight in the Chatur-Indriya (four-sense organ) state, nine in the Asanjee (non-conscious) Panch-Indriya (five-sense organ) state, and ten in the Sanjee (conscious) Panch-Indriya state. In the Aapt (deficient) state, there are four, five, six, and seven Pranas respectively. The explanation is as follows: There are ten Pranas in total - five Indriya Pranas (sense organ life forces), three Bal Pranas (strength life forces) - Aayu (life force) and Shwaso-chchwas (breathing). In the Aapt (deficient) state of Sanjee and Asanjee, the three Pranas - Shwaso-chchwas, Manobal (mental strength), and Vachanbal (speech strength) are not present, leaving seven Pranas. In the Aapt (deficient) state of Chatur-Indriya, the three Pranas mentioned above and Shrotrendriya (hearing sense organ) are not present, leaving six Pranas. In the Aapt (deficient) state of Tri-Indriya, the four Pranas mentioned above and Chakshu-Indriya (sight sense organ) are not present, leaving five Pranas. In the Aapt (deficient) state of Dvi-Indriya, the five Pranas mentioned above and Ghranendriya (smell sense organ) are not present, leaving four Pranas. In the Aapt (deficient) state of Eka-Indriya (one-sense organ), the six Pranas mentioned above and Shwaso-chchwas are not present, leaving three Pranas.
8289. The word 'Adi' used in the previous Sutra does not reveal the number of Indriyas. Therefore, the next Sutra explains to determine their quantity.
There are five Indriyas. ||15||
8290. The word 'Indriya' has been explained. The word 'Panch' used in the Sutra is to define the limit, meaning there are only five Indriyas. This means there are no more Indriyas. Doubt: Should the Karmendriyas like speech, etc. be included in this Sutra? Solution: They should not be included, because this is a context of use. This Sutra includes the Indriyas that are instrumental in use, not the Indriyas that are instrumental in action. Secondly, there is no limit to the Indriyas that are instrumental in action. All the organs and their parts, which are created by the Karma (action) of the body, are instrumental in action. Therefore, there is no rule that there are only five Karmendriyas.
8291. Now, to show the internal differences of these five Indriyas, the next Sutra says - They are each of two types. ||16||
$ 292. The word 'Vidh' means type. 'Dvividhani' is a Bahuvrihi compound meaning 'those which are of two types'. This means that each of these five Indriyas is of two types. 1. 'Vak-Panipada-Payu-Upasthani Karmendriyaniyah: -Sa. Ko. Ilo. 26. 2. Grahanam Kritam Na Kriya Mu., Ta., Na. 3. 'Kativihanam Bhanta Indiya Pannatta. Goyama, Duviha Pannatta. Tam Jaha - Davvindya Ya Bhavidya Ya -Pannavana Pad 151

Page #247:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[296] **What are the two types?**  The answer is: **Dravyendriya** and **Bhaavendriya**.

[293] To understand the nature of Dravyendriya, the following sutra is stated:

**Dravyendriya is the instrument of Nivritti.** [17]

[294] **Nivritti** is the creation. **What creates it?** The answer is: **Karma**. Karma is of two types: **Baahya Nivritti** (external creation) and **Aabhyantara Nivritti** (internal creation).

**Aabhyantara Nivritti** is the creation of pure Atma-pradeshas (regions of the soul) which are as numerous as the parts of an Utsadha-anguli (a measure of length), and are situated in a fixed arrangement of the senses like eyes, etc.

**Baahya Nivritti** is the accumulation of Pudgalas (matter particles) in those Atma-pradeshas, which are designated as senses, and which acquire a specific state due to the rise of **Naama Karma** (karma that determines the name and form).

**Upakaran** (instrument) is that which facilitates Nivritti. Like Nivritti, it is also of two types: **Aabhyantara** (internal) and **Baahya** (external).

In the case of the eye, the **Krishna-Shukla Mandala** (black and white circles) is the **Aabhyantara Upakaran**, while the eyelids and eyelashes are the **Baahya Upakaran**. The same principle applies to other senses.

[295] The following sutra describes Bhaavendriya:

**Bhaavendriya is the instrument of Labdhi and Upayoga.** [18]

[296] **Labdhi** means "to obtain". **What is Labdhi?** The answer is: **Labdhi** is the specific cessation of **Jnaanaavaran Karma** (karma that obscures knowledge).

**Upayoga** is the transformation of the soul that occurs due to the proximity of **Labdhi**, which enables the soul to engage in **Dravyendriya Nivritti**.

Page #248:
---------------------------
## 128]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[21188 296 Indriyam. Indriyaphala is upayoga, how can it be Indriyam? Because the dharma of the cause is seen in the effect. Just like the knowledge that has become the form of a pot is called a pot. And because the self-interest is the main thing there. The self-interest that the linga of Indra is Indriyam is the main thing in upayoga, because there is the statement "Upayogalakshano Jeeva". Therefore, it is justified to consider upayoga as Indriyam. The soul, due to contact, strives to create dravyendriya, the result of the soul for that is called upayoga. Labdhi and upayoga, both are bhaavendriyas. Doubt - Upayoga is the fruit of Indriyam, how can it be Indriyam? Solution - The dharma of the cause is seen in the effect. Just like the knowledge that has become the form of a pot is called a pot. Therefore, there is no objection in considering the fruit of Indriyam as Indriyam. Secondly, the meaning of Indriyam is mainly found in upayoga. The meaning is that "the linga of Indra is called Indriyam", this meaning of the word Indriyam is the main thing in upayoga, because the characteristic of the Jeeva is upayoga, such is the statement, therefore, it is appropriate to consider upayoga as Indriyam.

**J**  **Vishesharth** - Not allowing the specific synonyms of knowledge to manifest is the work of the rise of the all-destroying competitors of the desired knowledge-obstruction. But the Jeeva whose desired knowledge-obstruction is destroyed, due to the non-rise of the all-destroying competitors of that knowledge-obstruction, has the ability to come into the light of the desired knowledge, and this ability is called Labdhi. Such ability can be of all the knowledge that destroys the obstruction at the same time, but in upayoga, only one knowledge comes at one time. The meaning is that the synonym that has come in front of knowing the knowledge that destroys the obstruction is not called Labdhi, but the name of the specific destruction of the obstruction is Labdhi, and upayoga is the name of the appropriate synonym of knowledge. This is the reason why Labdhi can be of many knowledge at the same time, but upayoga is of only one knowledge at one time. Earlier, in the first chapter, sutra 14, it has been said that Mati-gyan happens due to Indriyam and mind. From this, it is known that the Indriyam designation is not of the knowledge of the form of upayoga, but the Indriyam designation is of the one which is the most effective cause in the happening of Mati-gyan and Shruta-gyan in the form of upayoga, therefore, it is right to call Nirvritti, Upkaran and Labdhi as Indriyam, because these are the most effective causes in the happening of Mati-gyan and Shruta-gyan in the form of upayoga, but it is not right to call upayoga itself as Indriyam, because it is the fruit of Indriyam vyapar. This is a doubt, the solution of which has been given by Pujyapad Swami in two ways. Firstly, it has been told that the dharma of the cause, Indriyatva, has been treated in the effect, and upayoga has also been called Indriyam. That is, upayoga itself is not Indriyam, but it happens due to Indriyam, therefore, it has been called Indriyam here by treatment. This is the first solution. While giving the second solution, the meaning of what he has written is that whatever makes Indra, that is, the soul, recognizable, is called Indriyam, and such a thing that makes it recognizable should be its own meaning. If it is seen from this point of view, then the main word of Indriyam is upayoga, because it is the own meaning of the soul. This is the reason why upayoga has also been called Indriyam here. The meaning is that considering the expectation of the cause, Nirvritti, Upkaran and Labdhi get the designation of Indriyam, and considering the expectation of self-interest, upayoga gets the designation of Indriyam. In the first chapter, only the expectation of the cause was used for the word Indriyam, and here, the difference of Indriyam has been shown by keeping both the cause and the main meaning in mind, therefore, there is no contradiction. 1. -Yogo Mukhya: Di. 1, Di. 2, Mu. 2. 'Buddhi-Indriyani Chakshu-Shrotra-Ghrana-Rasana-Tvaga-akhyani.' Saan.-Ko., Shlo. 61 Ghrana-Rasana-Chakshu-Trakshotrani-Indriyani Bhutebhyah. -Nyaa. Su.1,1,12.

Page #249:
---------------------------
[129
-2120 300]
Chapter Two $ 297. To explain the meaning of the senses mentioned above, the following sutra is stated:
Sparśana, rasana, ghraṇa, cakṣu, and śrotra are the five senses. ||19|| 8298. In the world, the senses are seen to be dependent. For example, "I see well with this eye," "I hear well with this ear." Therefore, due to their dependence, sparśana etc. become instruments. Due to the destruction of the obstacles of effort, knowledge, and the covering of the mind, and due to the cessation of the actions of the limbs, the soul touches through this, therefore it is sparśana. It tastes through this, therefore it is rasana. It smells through this, therefore it is ghraṇa. Since the word cakṣu has many meanings, here the meaning of seeing is taken, therefore it is cakṣu, through which one sees objects. And it is śrotra, through which one hears. Similarly, the independence of these senses is also seen. For example, "This eye of mine sees well," "This ear of mine hears well." Therefore, sparśana etc. are established as agents. That which touches is sparśana. That which tastes is rasana. That which smells is ghraṇa. That which sees is cakṣu. That which hears is śrotra. The order in which these are mentioned is to show that each one increases in this order.
8 299. To show the objects of these senses, the following sutra is stated:
Sparśa, rasa, gandha, varṇa, and śabda are the objects of those senses respectively. ||20|| 6 300. In the context of the predominance of substance and its modification, the words sparśa etc. should be understood as instruments of action and instruments of feeling. When the substance is predominant, then the action is indicated. For example, that which is touched is sparśa, that which is tasted is rasa, that which is smelled is gandha, that which is seen is varṇa, and that which is in the form of sound is śabda. This 1.  Jighratyanena ghraṇam gandham gṛhṇātīti. Rasayatyaneṇeniti rasanaṁ rasaṁ gṛhṇātīti. Caṣṭe'neneniti cakṣu rūpaṁ paśyatītixxśṛṇotyaneniti śrotra śabdaṁ gṛhṇātīti. -vā. mā. 1,..12. 2. Imānīndriyāṇi kadācittsvātantyena vivakṣitāni bhavanti. Tadyathā-idaṁ me akṣi suṣṭha paśyati, ayaṁ me karṇaḥ suṣṭha śṛṇotīti. Kadācitpāratavyena vivakṣitāni bhavanti-anenāṇā suṣṭha paśyāmi. Anena karṇena suṣṭha śṛṇomi iti. -pā. m. mā. ||2||2||59. 3. Gandharasarūpasparśaśabdaḥ pṛthivyādigunās tadarthaḥ. -vā. mā.

Page #250:
---------------------------
130] Sarvarthasiddhi
[2121 $ 301 The word "varna" is derived from "varnya" (to be described). The word "shabda" is derived from "shabdana" (to sound). When the emphasis is on the meaning of the synonym, then the meaning of the word is indicated. For example, "spardhana" is "sparsha" (touch), "rasana" is "rasa" (taste), "gandhana" is "gandha" (smell), "varnana" is "varna" (color), and "shabdana" is "shabda" (sound). The order of these is explained according to the order of the senses.
8301. Here it is said that since the mind is not a sense organ, it is not useful. But it is useful. Without it, the senses would not be able to fulfill their respective purposes in the objects. And, is the only purpose of the mind to help the senses, or is there another purpose? To answer this, the next sutra says:
Shruta is the object of the mind. ||21|| $ 302. The object of Shruta-jnana (knowledge of scriptures) is Shruta. It is the object of the mind, because when a being has attained the destruction and cessation of the covering of Shruta-jnana, then the mind, relying on itself, engages in knowledge of the object of Shruta-jnana. Or, Shruta means Shruta-jnana, and that is the purpose of the mind. This purpose is independent of the mind.
$ 303. In order to determine the ownership of the senses, which have definite objects, the first sense that was taken up was touch. To determine the ownership of touch, the next sutra says:
For beings with bodies ending in plants, there is one. ||22|| 1. - Shabda. Eshaam -mu. Ta.   Shabda. Teshaam -mu. 2. Shrutasyarthe -mu., Ta., Na.

Page #251:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

**8304.** The word "ekam" in the sutra means "first". Question: What is it? Answer: Touch. Question: Which beings have it? Answer: It should be known that it is present in beings from the earth-bodied to the plant-bodied. Now, the cause of its origin is stated: When the obstruction of the potency and the covering of the touch sense organ karma are destroyed and subsided, and when the remaining senses are overpowered by the arising of the all-destroying competitors, and when the body name karma is supported, and when the one-sense category name karma is dependent, then a single touch sense organ manifests.

**8305.** Now, to show the ownership of the other senses, the next sutra says:
"Worm, ant, bee, and human, etc., have one-one sense organ more in succession." || 23 ||

**8306.** "Ekak" is a double meaning in the sense of repetition. The senses have increased one by one, therefore they are called "ekakavrudha". These senses have increased from the worm onwards. The touch sense organ is dominant, therefore, from the touch sense organ onwards, they have increased one by one, thus the connection should be made. The word "adi" is connected with each. This means that the worm, etc., beings have two senses: touch and taste. The ant, etc., beings have three senses: touch, taste, and smell. The bee, etc., beings have four senses: touch, taste, smell, and sight. The human, etc., beings have five senses when the hearing sense organ is added to the previous four. Thus, the explanation of the connection between the mentioned beings and senses is given in order. The origin of the touch sense organ has been explained earlier, similarly, the origin of the remaining senses should be explained. But while explaining the cause of origin, the explanation should be given along with the arising of the all-destroying competitors related to the next sense organ whose cause of origin is being explained.

**8307.** Thus, in these two types of beings and with respect to the five types of sense organ differences, the five-sensed beings are not mentioned, therefore, to state them, the next sutra says:

Page #252:
---------------------------
[132] Sarvarthasiddhi
[2124 8308 Samjninah Samanaskah ||24|| 8308. Mano vyakhyatam. Saha tena ye vartante te Samanaskah. Sanjin ityuchyante. Pariseshyaditare samsarinah pranino'sashin iti siddham. Nanu ca sanjin ityenaiva gatartvat samanaskah iti visheshanamanarthakam. Yato mano vyaparo hitahitapraptipariharapariksha. Sanjnapi saiveti. Tadyuktam, sanjnasabdarthavyabhicarat. Sanjna nametyuchyate. Tadvantah sanshin iti sarveshamatiprasangah. Sanjna jnanamiti cet sarvesham praninam jnanatmakatvadatiprasangah. Aharadadivishayabhilashah sanjheti cet. Tulyam. Tasmat samanaskah ityuchyate. Evam ca kritva garbhandajamucchitasusptyachavasthasuhitahitapariksha bhavesapi manahsanni dhanatsanjitvamupapannam bhavat.
6309. Yadi hitahitadavishayaparispandah praninam manahpranidhanapurvakah. Athabhinavasharirgrahanam pratyapurnavishogapurva murtinirmanaskasya yat karma tat kut ityuchyate
Vigrahagatou karmayogaha ||25|| Manavale jiva sanji hote hain ||24||
8308. Man ka vyakhyan kar aayehi uske sath jo rahte hain ve samanask kahalate hain. Aur unhe hi sanji kahte hain. Parishesh nyay se yah siddha hua ki in se atitarik jitne sansari jiva hote hain ve sab asanji hote hain. Shanka sutra mein 'sanjnah' itna pad dene se hi kam chal jata hai, atah 'samanaskah' yah visheshan dena nishphal hai, kyonki hit ki prapti aur ahit ke tyag ki pariksha karne mein man ka vyapar hota hai aur yahi sanjna hai? Samadhan-yah kahna uchit nahin, kyonki sanjna shabd ke arth mein vyabhicar paya jata hain. Arthat sanjna shabd ke anek arth hain. Sanjna ka arth nam hai. Yadi nam vale jiva sanji mane jaye to sab jivo ko sanji pane ka prasang prapt hota hai. Sanjna ka arth yadi jnan liya jata hai to bhi sabhi pranin jnan svatav ho ne se sab ko sanji pane ka prasang prapt hota hai. Yadi aharad adi vishayo ki abhilasha ko sanjna kaha jata hai to bhi pahle ke saman dosh prapt hota hai. Arthat aharad adi vishayak abhilasha sab ke payi jati hai, isliye bhi sab ko sanji pane ka prasang prapt hota hai. Chunki ye dosh na prapt hon atah sutra mein 'samanaskah' yah pad rakha hai. Isse yah labh hai ki garbh j, andaj, mucchhit aur susupti adi avasthaon mein hitahit ki pariksha ke na hone par bhi man ke sambandh se sanji pana ban jata hain.
Vishesharth-prayah ekendriya adi pratyek jiva apne isht vishay mein pravritti karta hai aur anishta vishay se nivritta hota hai, fir bhi man ko svatantra satta svikar ki gayi hai so iska karan yah hai ki tulnatmak adhyayan, lok-paralok ka vichar, hitahit ka vivek adi karya aise hain jo man ke bina nahin ho sakte. Isi se man ki svatantra satta svikar ki gayi hai. Yah man jin ke hota hai ve sanji hote hain any nahin. Jivo ka sanji aur asanji yah bhed panchendriya jivo mein hi paya jata hai. Any ekendriya se lekar chaturindriya tak ke jiva to asanji hi hote hain. Arthat unke man na hone se ve ukt prakar ke jnan se vanchit rahte hain.
6309. Yadi jivo ke hit aur ahit adi vishay ke liye kriya man ke nimitt se hoti hai to jisne purva sharir ko chhod diya hai aur jo man rahit hai aisa jiva jab nutan sharir ko grahan karne ke liye udyat hota hai tab uske jo kriya hoti hai vah kis nimitt se hoti hai yahi batlane ke liye aage ka sutra kahte hain
Vihagati mein karman kaay yoga hota hai ||25|| 1. -shinah uchya-di. 1, di. 2, a.। 2. -narthakam. Mano -ta. na.।

Page #253:
---------------------------
[133
-21268 312]
Chapter Two $ 310. Vigraha is the body. Vigraha means the movement that is for the body. Or, Vigraha means the opposite of Graha, which means obstruction. The meaning is that even when Karma is taken, there is no taking of non-Karma Pudgalas, and there is no obstruction. With Vigraha, there is Vigraha-Gati. The Karmic body, which is the seed of the growth of all bodies, is called Karma. Yoga is the movement of the Atma-Pradesha, which is caused by the Vachan-Vargana, Mano-Vargana, and Kaya-Vargana. The Yoga that is done by Karma is called Karma-Yoga, and it happens in Vigraha-Gati. This is the meaning of the statement. From this, there is the taking of new Karma and the movement from one country to another.
311. It is said that the movement of Jivas and Pudgalas from one country to another is done by the order of the Akasha-Pradeshas, or without it. Now, to explain this, the next Sutra is said:
The movement is according to the श्रेणी. ॥26॥
8312. From the middle of the Lok, upwards, downwards, and sideways, the order of the Akasha-Pradeshas is called श्रेणी. The word 'Anu' is used in the sense of 'Anupurvi'. Therefore, 'Anu-Shreni' means 'according to the order of the श्रेणी'. This is the movement of Jivas and Pudgalas. The question is, how can Pudgalas be taken here, since they are not authorized? The answer is that the word 'Gati' is taken in the Sutra, which proves that unauthorized Pudgalas are also intended here. If only the movement of Jivas was intended, then there would have been no need to take the word 'Gati' in the Sutra, because the taking of the word 'Gati' is proven by authority. Secondly, the word 'Jiva' is taken in the next Sutra, so it is known that Pudgalas are also intended in this Sutra. The question is, the movement of the Jyotishkas like the Moon, etc., and the movement of the Vidyadharas, etc., in the clockwise direction of the Meru is seen, so why is it said that the movement of Jivas and Pudgalas is Anu-Shreni? The answer is that the time and space rules should be known here. The time rule is as follows: when a Jiva leaves one Bhav at the time of death, 1. -व्याघातः । नोकर्म-ता., ना.। 2. -रानुपूर्वेणा- आ.। 3. ज्योतिषां आ., दि. 1, दि. 2 ।

Page #254:
---------------------------
134]
Sarvarthasiddhi
[2126 § 312
The movement of living beings at the time of death, and the upward movement of liberated beings at the time of their transition to another existence, is always in a straight line. The rule of the country is also upward, downward, or sideways. The movement of pudgalas, which reaches the end of the world, is also in a straight line. Other movements are possible.
8 313. To further explain the special types of movement, the next sutra says: The movement of a liberated being is without obstruction. ||27||
$ 314 Obstruction means hindrance or crookedness. The movement that is without obstruction is the movement that is without hindrance or crookedness. Whose movement is this? Of a living being. What kind of living being? A liberated being. How do we know that the movement of a liberated being is without obstruction? The next sutra uses the word "samsari" (worldly), which indicates that this sutra is referring to the movement of a liberated being. But the previous sutra already explained that there is no transition from one category to another. What is the purpose of this sutra? This sutra is meant to indicate that there is sometimes movement in a straight line. But the previous sutra already mentioned the rules of the country and time. No, because this sutra proves it.
$ 315. If it is claimed that the movement of a liberated soul is without obstruction and reaches the end of the world in a fixed time, then what about the movement of a worldly soul? Is it obstructed or is it without obstruction like the movement of a liberated soul? The next sutra answers this question:
The movement of a worldly being is both without obstruction and with obstruction. The movement with obstruction occurs before the fourth time, that is, for three times.
1. Ntaadavgatakala Mu.

Page #255:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[135 $ 316. The term 'Praak Chaturvya' is used to determine time. The word 'Praak' signifies a limit, meaning that motion with a bend occurs before the fourth time, but not in the fourth time. Why is this so? Because in a Nishkuta Kshetra, where the most excellent bend-causing factors are present, a being born in that Nishkuta Kshetra, due to the absence of an Anupurvi Anushreni Bhava, does not have Ishu Gati. Therefore, this being starts a motion with three bends to attain the Nishkuta Kshetra. There is no need for more bends because there is no such Uppapad Kshetra. Therefore, motion with bends occurs only for three times, not in the fourth time. The word 'Cha' signifies a collection, which includes both motion with bends and motion without bends.

[317. The time for motion with bends has been determined. Now, to understand how much time is for motion without bends, the next sutra states:

Motion with one time is without bends. ||29||

[318. The motion that takes one time is called motion with one time. The motion that does not have a bend, or a turn, is called motion without bends. For beings and Pudgalas that are in motion, motion with one time occurs even up to the end of the Lok, due to the absence of any obstruction.

[319. In the continuous chain of Karma Bandha, which is without beginning, due to the influence of Mithyadarshana and other wrong beliefs, a being who receives Karma, also receives Aharaka even in motion with bends. Therefore, to establish a rule, the next sutra states:

A being remains without Aharaka for one, two, or three times. ||30||

[320. Due to the authority of time, there is a connection with it here. The word 'Va' signifies an alternative, and the alternative is taken as far as it is intended. The meaning is that a being can remain without Aharaka for one time, two times, or three times. For three bodies, there are six Paryaptis.

Page #256:
---------------------------
##  [136] Sarvartha Siddhi

[2131 $ 321] The intake of suitable pudgalas is called Aahar. The absence of this is called Anaahar. The intake of karma is continuous in the state of the karmic body. When the jiva is moving towards the upapadakshetra, it is called Aahar. In the other three times, it is called Anaahar. 8321. Thus, to explain the different types of birth of a jiva entering a new murti, the sutra says:

Sammurchhana, Garbha and Upapad are the (three) types of birth. ||31|| 8322. In the three lokas, above, below and sideways, the complete absorption of the body is called Sammurchhana. This means the absorption of pudgalas from all sides to form the body. The mixture of shukra and shonit in the womb of a woman is called Garbha. Or, the absorption of the food consumed by the mother is called Garbha. The place where the jiva enters and starts moving is called Upapad. Upapad is a specific name for the place of birth of devas and narakas. These three are the types of birth for the jiva in samsara, which are the results of different karmas that bind due to auspicious and inauspicious consequences.

323. So far, we have discussed the birth that is the basis for the enjoyment and experience of the objects of samsara. Now, we should discuss the different types of yonis. Therefore, the next sutra says:

Sachitta, Sheet and Samvrita, and their opposites Achitta, Ushna and Vivrita, and the mixture of these, i.e., Sachitta-achitta, Sheet-ushna and Samvrita-vivrita, are the yonis of birth. ||32|| 8324. The special manifestation of the soul's chaitanya is called Chitta. The one who lives with Chitta is called Sachitta. Sheet is a type of touch. Like shukla, etc., it is a word for both the substance and the quality. Samvrita means completely surrounded.

Page #257:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

**The concept of "Durupa Lakshya Pradesh" is explained.**

**"Setara" means "those who exist with others," implying "with opposing elements."**

**Question: Who are these "others"?**

**Answer:** They are those who are **achit** (non-conscious), **ushna** (hot), and **vivrut** (open). Those who are **ubhayatmaka** (dualistic) are called **mishra** (mixed). For example, **sachitta-achitta** (conscious-non-conscious), **shito-ushna** (cold-hot), and **samvrit-vivrut** (closed-open).

**The word "cha" (and) indicates a collective sense, implying that there are also mixed types of yonis.** Otherwise, "mishra" would simply be an adjective for the previously mentioned types.

**The word "ekasha" (one by one) is used for emphasis.** It is included in the sutra to emphasize the sequential and mixed nature of the yonis. This helps us understand that the yonis are **sachitta**, **achitta**, **sheet**, **ushna**, **samvrit**, and **vivrut** in that order. It is not meant to be understood as **sachitta**, **sheet**, etc.

**The word "tat" (that) is used to indicate the different types of birth.** It implies that these yonis are the sources of births like **sammurchhana** (fainting) and others.

**In total, there are nine yonis to be understood.**

**Question: Is there no difference between yoni and birth?**

**Answer: No, there is a difference due to the distinction between "adhara" (base) and "adhey" (dependent).** These **sachitta** etc. yonis are the **adharas**, and the different types of birth are the **adheyas**. This is because the soul, residing in the **sachitta** etc. yonis, acquires **pudgalas** (particles) suitable for the body, food, and senses through births like **sammurchhana**.

**Devas (gods) and Narakas (hell beings) have achitta yonis.** This is because their **upapadadesha** (place of origin) is made up of **pudgalaprachay** (accumulation of particles), which is **achitta**.

**Garbhajas (those born from the womb) have mishra yonis.** This is because the **shukra** (semen) and **shonit** (blood) in the mother's womb are **achitta**, and they mix with the **sachitta** soul of the mother, resulting in a **mishra yoni**.

**Sammurchhanajas (those born through fainting) have three types of yonis.** Some have **sachitta yonis**, others have **achitta yonis**, and some have **mishra yonis**.

**Those with ordinary bodies have sachitta yonis.** This is because they depend on each other for survival.

**The remaining sammurchhana beings have both achitta and mishra yonis.**

**Devas and Narakas have both sheet and ushna yonis.** This is because their **upapadasthanas** (places of origin) are some cold and some hot.

**Tejaskaayikas (those with a fiery body) have ushna yonis.**

**The remaining beings have three types of yonis.** Some have **sheet yonis**, some have **ushna yonis**, and some have **mishra yonis**.

**1. Mishram Mishrayoni: A., Di. 1, Di. 2.**

Page #258:
---------------------------
[138] Sarvath Siddhau
[2132 8324] Some are of the *Sheeta Yoni* (cold womb), some are of the *Ushna Yoni* (hot womb). Those born of the *Ushna Yoni* are *Taijaskaayika* (fiery bodied). The others are of the *Trivikalapa Yoni* (three-fold womb). Some are of the *Sheeta Yoni* (cold womb), some are of the *Ushna Yoni* (hot womb), and others are of the *Mitra Yoni* (friendly womb). The *Deva* (celestial beings) and *Naraka* (hellish beings) are of the *Samvrita Yoni* (closed womb) with one sense organ. The *Vikalendriya* (disabled) are of the *Vivrita Yoni* (open womb). The *Garbhaja* (born from the womb) are of the *Mishra Yoni* (mixed womb). There are eighty-four hundred thousand types of these Yonis, as known from the *Agamas* (sacred texts). It is said:
"There are seven hundred thousand *Nitya Nigoda* (eternal beings), seven hundred thousand *Itara Nigoda* (other beings), seven hundred thousand *Prithvi Kayika* (earth-bodied beings), seven hundred thousand *Jal Kayika* (water-bodied beings), seven hundred thousand *Agni Kayika* (fire-bodied beings), seven hundred thousand *Vayu Kayika* (air-bodied beings), ten hundred thousand *Vrikshas* (trees), six hundred thousand *Vikalendriya* (disabled), four hundred thousand *Deva* (celestial beings), four hundred thousand *Naraka* (hellish beings), and fourteen hundred thousand *Tiryancha* (animals) and *Manushya* (humans)."
8325. Thus, in this predicament of nine *Yonis* and three births, which are obtained by all living beings without any control, the following *Sutra* (aphorism) is stated to determine your understanding:
The *Jarayuja* (born from the womb), *Andaja* (born from eggs), and *Pota* (born from the womb) have *Garbha Janma* (birth from the womb). ||33||
8326. The *Jarayu* (womb) is like a net, which is the covering of the living being and is made of flesh and blood. The *Anda* (egg) is like the skin of a nail, hard, round, and its covering is made of semen and blood. The *Pota* (born from the womb) is a being whose all limbs are complete without any covering, and who is born from the womb with the ability to move and act. Those born from the *Jarayu* (womb) are called *Jarayuja* (born from the womb). Those born from the *Anda* (egg) are called *Andaja* (born from eggs). The *Sutra* (aphorism) uses the *Dvandva Samasa* (compound word) for *Jarayuja* (born from the womb), *Andaja* (born from eggs), and *Pota* (born from the womb). All these are *Garbha Yoni* (wombs).
327. If the *Garbha Janma* (birth from the womb) of these *Jarayuja* (born from the womb), *Andaja* (born from eggs), and *Pota* (born from the womb) is determined, then tell us which beings have *Upapada Janma* (birth from the womb). Therefore, the following *Sutra* (aphorism) is stated to give knowledge about this:
The *Deva* (celestial beings) and *Naraka* (hellish beings) have *Upapada Janma* (birth from the womb). ||34|| 1. *Moolachar* (Primary Conduct), *Ga* (Chapter) 5.29 and 12.63 1 *Go* (Chapter), *Ji* (Chapter), *Ga* (Chapter).

Page #259:
---------------------------
-2136 8331] Chapter Two
[13 8 328. Now, regarding the birth of other beings, it is said:
The remaining beings have *sammurchana* birth. ||35|| 8329. The remaining beings are those other than those born from the womb and *upapada*. Their birth is *sammurchana*. These three sutras are for the purpose of establishing a rule. The rule should be understood from both sides. The womb birth is only for the *jarayuj*, *andaj*, and *pot* beings. Or, the *jarayuj*, *andaj*, and *pot* beings have only womb birth. The *upapada* birth is only for the gods and hell beings. Or, the gods and hell beings have only *upapada* birth. The *sammurchana* birth is only for the remaining beings. Or, the remaining beings have only *sammurchana* birth.
8330. Now, regarding the bodies of those beings who are transmigrating, who are born from three types of births, who have many variations and nine types of wombs, and whose bodies are the result of the fruition of auspicious and inauspicious *karma*, and who are the basis for experiencing the fruits of bondage, it is said:
There are five bodies: *audarik*, *vaikriyik*, *aharaka*, *taijas*, and *karman*. ||36|| 8331. The bodies are those which, having been obtained through the arising of specific *karma*, decay. The *audarik* etc. are those which are obtained through the arising of specific natures. *Udara* means gross. *Audarik* is derived from the word *udara* by adding the suffix *ika* to denote the meaning of being born from *udara* or having *udara* as its purpose. *Vaikriyik* is that which has the purpose of *vikriya*, which is the creation of a body of various sizes, small and large, through the power of the eight qualities of *aishwarya* (divine powers). *Aharaka* is that which is created by a *pramatta-samyata* (one who is careless and restrained) in order to know subtle objects or to desire to overcome *asamyam* (lack of restraint). *Taijas* is that which is caused by *tejas* (light) or is born in *tejas*. *Karman* is the work of *karma*. Although all bodies are caused by *karma*, due to convention, the specific body is called the *karman* body. 1. 'The body is the support of the sense organs and their objects.' *Nyaya Sutra* 1, 1, 11. 2. *Udara* means *audarik*. *Udara* *Muni*.

Page #260:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi 

**8332.** How do the senses perceive the Audārika body but not the other bodies? To explain this, we present the next sūtra: The subsequent body is more subtle. ||37||

**8333.** Although the word "para" has multiple meanings, here it signifies the order of the bodies. Even though the bodies are distinct, they are connected by the subtle qualities. This is indicated by the word "paramparām". The Audārika body is gross. The Vaikriya body is more subtle than the Audārika. The Āhārika body is more subtle than the Vaikriya. The Tejas body is more subtle than the Āhārika. And the Kārmaṇa body is more subtle than the Tejas.

**8334.** If the subsequent bodies are more subtle, then they should also be smaller in terms of their regions. To address this contradiction, we present the next sūtra:

**8335.** The three bodies preceding the Tejas body are infinitely larger in terms of their regions than the subsequent body. ||38||

The word "pradeśa" is derived from "pradiśyante", meaning "atoms". What is beyond number is called "asanख्येय". A body with an infinite number of atoms is called "asanख्येयguṇa". The question arises: In comparison to what? The answer is: In comparison to the regions, not in comparison to the perception. The word "paramparām" from the previous sūtra implies that the Kārmaṇa body is also infinitely large. To address this, the sūtra uses the phrase "prāk tejasāt". This means that the bodies preceding the Tejas body are infinitely larger than the subsequent body. The Vaikriya body is infinitely larger in terms of its regions than the Audārika body. The question arises: What is the measure of this infinite number of atoms? The answer is: A fraction of a palya. The question arises: If this is the case, then the subsequent bodies would be infinitely larger than the previous bodies. The answer is: This is not a problem because due to the specific nature of the bond, there is no difference in size. This is like a pile of cotton and a ball of iron.

**8336.** Are the regions of the subsequent two bodies equal, or is there some difference? To answer this, we present the next sūtra:

Page #261:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two: The Infinitely Numerous Qualities of the Soul

**39.** The term "pradeshato" (from the region) is carried over from the previous sutra. Thus, the connection should be made: the regions of the taijas (luminous) body are infinitely numerous compared to the aharak (food-consuming) body, and the regions of the karman (action) body are infinitely numerous compared to the taijas body. What is the multiplier? The multiplier is the infinite part of the liberated souls and the infinite number of the unliberated souls.

**40.** **Objection:** Just as a nail, etc., prevents a being from going to its desired place, similarly, due to being constituted by material substance, the samsari (worldly) jiva (soul) is faced with the possibility of being prevented from attaining its desired liberation. **Solution:** This is not a fault, because both these bodies are free from obstruction.

**39.** The obstruction of one material substance by another material substance is called "pratighata" (obstruction). There is no such obstruction between these two bodies, hence they are free from obstruction. Just as fire, due to its subtle nature, enters an iron ball, similarly, there is no obstruction between the taijas and karman bodies and things like a vajra (diamond) plate, etc. **Objection:** There is no obstruction between the vaikriyik (transforming) and aharak bodies either, then why are only the taijas and karman bodies called obstruction-free? **Solution:** The absence of obstruction is intended here in a general sense. Just as the taijas and karman bodies are free from obstruction everywhere in the world, this is not the case with the vaikriyik and aharak bodies.

**40.** **Question:** Is this the only difference between these two bodies, or is there any other difference? **Answer:** The next sutra explains this.

**41.** They are eternally connected with the soul.

**8341.** The word "cha" (and) in the sutra indicates an alternative. This means:
1. They are eternally connected with the soul, and they are infinitely numerous compared to the previous bodies.
2. They are infinitely numerous compared to the previous bodies, and they are free from obstruction.

Page #262:
---------------------------
[142]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[2141 $ 341 The Taijasa and Karmana bodies have an Anadi (beginningless) and Sadi (beginningful) relationship, like a seed and a tree. The Audarika, Vaikriyika, and Aharaka bodies are sometimes present in a Jiva, but not the Taijasa and Karmana bodies. They are always connected to the Jiva until the end of Samsara. 8342. Whether these Taijasa and Karmana bodies are present in all Jivas or only in some, is explained in the next Sutra:
**Sarvasya** [421] 8343. The word "Sarva" means "all". It means that both these bodies are present in all Jivas in Samsara.
8344. To show that all Jivas in Samsara are connected to the Taijasa and Karmana bodies, and to show the possibility of different combinations of bodies, the next Sutra says:
**Tadadiani Bhajyani Yugaparde Kasyacatuvyaha** [43] 8345. The word "Tat" refers to the Taijasa and Karmana bodies mentioned earlier. "Tadadi" means those who have the Taijasa and Karmana bodies as their beginning. "Bhajyani" and "Vikalpini" are synonyms, meaning "optional". The meaning is that a Jiva can have two to four bodies at the same time. One Jiva may have the Taijasa and Karmana bodies. Another may have the Audarika, Taijasa, and Karmana bodies, or the Vaikriyika, Taijasa, and Karmana bodies. Another may have the Audarika, Aharaka, Taijasa, and Karmana bodies. This is the division that is made here.
**Explanation:** The 47th Sutra mentions the birth of a Vaikriyika body through the power of special Tapas. Therefore, the question arises whether a Siddha (enlightened being) can have five bodies at the same time. 1. - Sambandhe'pi ca muh. 2. - Deka-sminna ca - mu.

Page #263:
---------------------------
-2144 $ 347]
Chapter Two 8 346. To further explain the specific characteristics of these bodies, the following sutra is stated:
The last body is without enjoyment. ||44|| 8347. The last one is called the last. What is it? It is the karmic body. The enjoyment of sounds etc. through the sensory channels is called enjoyment. This is not found in the last body; therefore, it is without enjoyment. Even though there is a movement of the subtle body, there is no enjoyment of sounds etc. because there is no formation of the gross sensory organs. Question: The luminous body is also without enjoyment, so why is it said here that the last body is without enjoyment? Answer: The luminous body is not even a cause in yoga, therefore, it has no authority in the consideration of enjoyment.
What is the harm in believing that? The solution is that the Vaikriya and Aharaka Riddhi do not occur simultaneously, so one cannot have a Vaikriya body along with an Aharaka body. Secondly, the reaction that is obtained from special austerities is related to the Audarika body. It is not appropriate to consider it as an independent Vaikriya body. In the karma literature, the body obtained from the rise of the Vaikriya body karma is counted as the Vaikriya body. Therefore, due to the difference in authority, the Vaikriya body cannot be formed along with the Audarika and Aharaka bodies. This is the reason why a maximum of four bodies have been mentioned.
8346. To further explain the specific characteristics of these bodies, the following sutra is stated:
The last body is without enjoyment. ||44||
8347. The last one is called the last. Question: What is the last body? Answer: The karmic body. The enjoyment of sounds etc. through the sensory channels is called enjoyment. This is not found in the last body; therefore, it is without enjoyment. Even though there is a movement of the subtle body, there is no enjoyment of sounds etc. because there is no formation of the gross sensory organs. Question: The luminous body is also without enjoyment, so why is it said here that the last body is without enjoyment? Answer: The luminous body is not even a cause in yoga, therefore, it has no authority in the consideration of enjoyment.
For special purposes, the Audarika, Vaikriya, and Aharaka bodies have sensory organs formed in them, and through them, they enjoy their respective objects. Therefore, these three bodies are considered to be with enjoyment. Although the karmic body yoga occurs only for the Kevalis, at the time of their liberation and the filling of the world, and during the movement of the subtle body, but during the time of liberation and the filling of the world, there is only knowledge, so the question of enjoyment does not arise there. Only during the movement of the subtle body, when the karmic body yoga is present, the question arises whether there is enjoyment or not. And to answer this question, the sutra "Nirupobhogamantyam" has been composed. While explaining why the last body is without enjoyment, it has been stated that during the movement of the subtle body, there are subtle senses but no gross senses, therefore, there is no enjoyment of objects like sounds etc. This is the reason why the last body is called without enjoyment. As for the luminous body, it does not have its own independent authority like the other four bodies. The non-released luminous body is always present in all sentient beings, and the released luminous body is occasional. Thus, the luminous body is found in all sentient beings, but it is not a cause in the self-consciousness, therefore, it is not considered useful in enjoying objects through the senses. This is the reason why the question of whether the luminous body is without enjoyment or with enjoyment does not arise. 1. -No authority. It is said there-Ta., Na.

Page #264:
---------------------------
144]
Sarvarthasiddhi
[2145 § 348
348. In the births described with these characteristics, are all bodies born in the same way, or is there any difference? To answer this, the next Sutra says:
The first body is born from the womb and from unconsciousness. ||45||
§ 349: According to the order of the Sutras, the word *ādy* refers to the *audārika* body. Whatever is born from the womb and from unconsciousness, all that should be considered *audārika*.
8350. After this, the next Sutra tells us from which birth the body described next is born:
The *aupapādika* body is born from *upapāda*. ||46||
8351. What is born in *upapāda* is called *aupapādika*. All such bodies should be known as *vaikriyika*.
8352. If the *aupapādika* body is *vaikriyika*, then the body that is not *aupapādika* cannot be *vaikriyika*. To clarify this, the next Sutra says:
It is also born from *labdhi*. ||47||
8353. The word *ca* in the Sutra connects with the *vaikriyika* body. *Labdhi* is the attainment of *ṛddhi* through special austerities. The *labdhi* that is the cause of this is called *labdhi-pratyaya*. The *vaikriyika* body is also *labdhi-pratyaya*. This is the connection to be made here.
8354. Is this the only body that is born from *labdhi*, or is there another one? To answer this, the next Sutra says:
The *tejas* body is also born from *labdhi*. ||48||

Page #265:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[2149 8358] Chapter Two
[145 6355] The word 'api' (also) refers to the 'labdhi-pratyaya' (gaining body). This means that the Tejas body is also a 'labdhi-pratyaya'.
[356] After the Vaikriya body, the following sutra describes the nature of the body and its owner:
The Aharaka body is auspicious, pure, non-violent, and belongs only to the Pramattasanyata. ||49||
[8357] It is called auspicious because it is the cause of auspicious karma. This body is the cause of auspicious karma, which is the Aharaka Kaya Yoga, hence it is called auspicious. Here, the effect is used to describe the cause. Just like food is called 'pran' (life) because it is the cause of life. It is called pure because it is the effect of pure karma. The Aharaka body is called pure because it is the effect of pure karma, which is free from defects and is a virtuous karma. Here, the cause is used to describe the effect. Just like cotton is called 'tantu' (thread) because it is the cause of thread. It is non-violent because it does not cause harm to any other body, nor does any other body cause harm to it. The word 'cha' (and) is used to indicate the combined purpose of the Aharaka body. For example, the Aharaka body is created to indicate the presence of specific gains, to determine subtle substances, and to protect the restraint. The word 'Aharaka' refers to the Aharaka body mentioned earlier. When the soul begins to create the Aharaka body, it becomes 'pramatta' (distracted), hence the sutra says that the Aharaka body belongs only to the 'Pramattasanyata'. The word 'eva' (only) is used to emphasize the intended meaning. This means that the Aharaka body belongs only to the 'Pramattasanyata' and not to anyone else. However, it does not mean that only the 'Pramattasanyata' has the Aharaka body. This means that the 'Pramattasanyata' does not have the Audarika and other bodies. Therefore, the word 'eva' is used along with the word 'Pramattasanyata'.
[8358] What is the state of the transmigrating souls who possess these bodies in each of their movements? 1. The karma of virtue...

Page #266:
---------------------------
146]
It is asked whether there is any such thing as a neuter gender. To this, the text says:
**All-purpose accomplishment:**
Naraka-sammoochhina are neuter. ||50||
8359. Narakas will be discussed later. Those who are born in Narakas are called Narakas. Sammoochchhana is sammoochchha, those who have it are called sammoochchhina. Naraka and sammoochchhina are both called Naraka-sammoochchhina. Due to the arousal of the neuter knowledge of the four types of karma - charitra, moha, vikalpa, and nokashaya, and the arousal of the inauspicious karma, they become neither male nor female, but neuter. It is a rule that Naraka-sammoochchhina are only neuter. For there, there is no even slight amount of pleasure, even in the form of pleasant sounds, smells, sights, tastes, and touches, which are related to the objects of the mind, namely, women and men.
$ 360. If this is established, then it is understood that other beings in the cycle of birth and death are tri-linga, i.e., they have three genders. To explain this, where there is a complete absence of the neuter gender, the text says:
-2150 § 359]
Not the Devas. ||51||
8361. Devas experience the supreme pleasure of the male and female genders, which is related to the auspicious karma of good birth. Therefore, there are no neuters among them.
$ 362. Then, it is asked, what about the other beings? To this, the text says:
The rest are tri-veda. ||52||
8 363. Those who have three vedas are called tri-veda. What are these three vedas? They are femaleness, maleness, and neuterness. Are there three genders, or is there a separate rule for gender? To explain this, the next sutra says:
Naraka and sammoochchhina are neuter. ||50||
8359. We will discuss Narakas later. Those who are born in Narakas are called Narakas. Sammoochchhana is sammoochchha, those who have it are called sammoochchhina. The sutra uses the compound word Naraka-sammoochchhina, which means both Naraka and sammoochchhina. There are two types of charitra-moha karma: kapaya and nokashaya. The arousal of the neuter knowledge from the nokashaya karma and the arousal of the inauspicious karma cause the beings to become neither male nor female, but neuter. Here, it is important to understand that Naraka-sammoochchhina are only neuter. These beings do not experience even a slight amount of pleasure related to the objects of the mind, namely, women and men, which arises from pleasant sounds, smells, sights, tastes, and touches.
$ 360. If the neuter knowledge of the above beings is established, then it is understood that other beings in the cycle of birth and death are tri-linga, i.e., they have three genders. To explain this, where there is a complete absence of the neuter gender, the next sutra says:
Devas are not neuter. ||51||
$ 361. Devas experience the supreme pleasure of the male and female genders, which is related to the auspicious karma of good birth. Therefore, there are no neuters among them.

$ 362. To explain what about the other beings, the next sutra says:
The rest are tri-veda. ||52||
8363. Those who have three vedas are called tri-veda. The question arises: what are these three vedas? 1. masti, 2. sammoo, 3. tyantanapur, 4. neuter gender.

Page #267:
---------------------------
## Chapter Two

[147] How is their (the beings') attainment (of a body) known? It is known through the Veda. This is the meaning of Linga. It is of two types: Dravya-linga and Bhava-linga. Dravya-linga is established by the arising of name-karma like Yoni, Mehana, etc. Bhava-linga is established by the arising of No-kṣaya. From the arising of Stri-veda, there is a womb, hence a woman. From the arising of Puruṣa-veda, one gives birth to offspring, hence a man. From the arising of Napuṁsaka-veda, one is devoid of both these powers, hence a eunuch. These are established words. In established words, action is for the sake of etymology. For example, one who goes is a cow. Otherwise, if the meaning of the word is taken as primarily based on the action of bearing a child, etc., then there would be no designation of woman, etc., for children, old people, animals, humans, gods, and those who are in the state of Karmaṇakāya-yoga, as they do not have the action of bearing a child, etc. These three Vedas are for the remaining beings, i.e., those born from a womb.

8364. Those beings who are described as having different characteristics related to birth, womb, body, and linga, like gods, etc., who are controlled by various virtues and vices, and who hold bodies in the four states of existence, do they attain other bodies after enjoying their lifespan in due time, or do they attain other bodies even before their lifespan is complete? To answer this, the next sūtra says:

Those who are born from Upāpadaka, who have the highest body, and who have a lifespan of countless years, are those who have no lifespan. ||53||

1. Man. Both of them - A., Di. 1 - Di. 21

Page #268:
---------------------------
[148] Sarvartha Siddhi
[2153 83658365. This is an explanation of the Aupapādika, which are the Devas and Narakas. The word "charma" means "final". The word "uttama" means "excellent". Those whose bodies are final and excellent are called "charmotama deha" (bodies of the highest excellence). The meaning is that those whose samsara is near, that is, those who are about to attain liberation in the same bhava, are called "charmotama deha". Asankhyeya is a special quantity that is beyond number. The meaning is that those whose lifespan is known by means of similes like "palya" etc., are called those who have an immeasurable lifespan, born in the Tiryanch and Manushya realms, in the Uttarakuru etc. Those who have Aupapādika birth and also have charmotama deha, and also have an immeasurable lifespan, are called Aupapādika charmotama deha asankhyeya varsha ayush (those with an immeasurable lifespan, having the highest excellence of body, born from Aupapādika birth). If there is an external cause of harm, such as poison, weapons, etc., the lifespan becomes short, which is called "apavarya" (diminished lifespan). Those whose lifespan is diminished are called "apavayuṣa" (those with diminished lifespan). Those whose lifespan is not diminished are called "anpavaayuṣa" (those with undiminished lifespan). For these Aupapādika etc. beings, their lifespan does not diminish due to external causes, this is a rule, and for the rest of the beings, there is no such rule. The adjective "uttama" in the sutra is given to show the excellence of the charma body. There is no other special meaning here. Or, in place of the reading "charmotama deha", the reading "charma deha" is also found.
Special Meaning - The lifespan that is being enjoyed does not increase, it can only be diminished by being stimulated, so the question arises whether the lifespan of all beings in samsara diminishes or if there is an exception to this. The present sutra is composed in answer to this question. It states that the lifespan of the Devas and Narakas who are born from Aupapādika birth, the Manushya who are about to attain liberation from that birth, and the Tiryanch and Manushya who have an immeasurable lifespan, does not diminish. They enjoy their full lifespan and then the end of that period comes. The reason for making this special rule is that according to karma-shastra, the karma that is obtained can be enjoyed in a short time when both the causes are present, except for the karma of "nikachana", "nidhatti" and "upashamakaran". This rule also applies to the lifespan that is being enjoyed, so this sutra establishes that this rule does not apply to the lifespan of the aforementioned beings. The intention is that at the beginning of the enjoyment of their lifespan, the niṣekas (seeds) of their lifespan are gradually manifested one by one and then they reach their end. They are not harmed by external causes like poison, weapons, etc. But this does not mean that their lifespan karma is not stimulated. It is possible for them to be stimulated, but this stimulation does not cause the destruction of the niṣekas. By "destruction of the niṣekas", we mean that their full niṣekas are not destroyed by stimulation. The sutra uses the term "charmotama deha" for those who are about to attain liberation from that birth. In the Sarvartha Siddhi tika, while explaining this, the charma body is considered to be the uttama (excellent) body, but in the Tattvarth Rajavatika, first, a separate meaning is given to charma deha and uttama deha, but later, the body of Chakradhara etc., who have uttama deha, is considered to have apavarya ayu (diminished lifespan), and the word "uttama" is used to mean... 1. -dehaḥ. Viparita- Mu. 2. Ityarthaḥ. Atitasanchyan- Ta. Na.

Page #269:
---------------------------
-2153 $ 365] Chapter Two
[149 This rule states that the lifespan of *padika* and others is diminished due to external causes. This is not the rule for others. The taking of the best is not a separate meaning for the purpose of demonstrating the excellence of the final body. Or the reading is 'final body'.
Thus ends the second chapter of the *Tattvartha-vritti*, known as *Sarvarthasiddhi*. ||2||
The final body has been taken as an adjective. One thing is clear that there has been a dispute about the word *uttama* from the beginning. That is why in *Sarvarthasiddhi*, the reading 'final body' has been indicated as a variant reading, and this variant reading was received by them from the previous tradition.
Thus ends the second chapter of the *Tattvartha-vritti* called *Sarvarthasiddhi*. ||2||
1. Reading. ||2|| The differences in the nature, characteristics, means, and object of the *jiva* are also discussed. The differences in motion, birth, womb, body, and gender, and the diminished lifespan are also discussed in this chapter. This is the connection. || *Tattvartha-mukhya* || Reading. ||2|| The differences in the nature, characteristics, means, and object of the *jiva* are also discussed. The differences in motion, birth, womb, body, and gender, and the diminished lifespan are also discussed there. || *Tattvartha-na* ||

Page #270:
---------------------------
## Chapter Three

**366.** The term "Nārakas" is mentioned in the sūtra "Bhavapratyayo'vadhidevanārakāṇām" and so on. Therefore, the question arises: who are these Nārakas? To explain this, we will now describe their dwelling places.

**1.** There are seven earths: Ratnaprabhā, Śarkarāprabhā, Valukāprabhā, Paṅkaprabhā, Dhūmaprabhā, Tamaḥprabhā, and Mahātamaḥprabhā. These are supported by dense water, wind, and space, and are situated one below the other.

**800.** The compound "Ratnaśarkarāvālukapāṅkadhūmatamomahātāmāḥ" is a dvandva compound. The word "Prabhā" should be understood as being connected to each of the preceding words. This is due to the principle of saṃhācarya (mutual association). The earth whose brilliance is like that of jewels like citra etc. is called Ratnaprabhā. The earth whose brilliance is like that of sugar is called Śarkarāprabhā. The earth whose brilliance is like that of sand is called Valukāprabhā. The earth whose brilliance is like that of mud is called Paṅkaprabhā. The earth whose brilliance is like that of smoke is called Dhūmaprabhā. The earth whose brilliance is like that of darkness is called Tamaḥprabhā. The earth whose brilliance is like that of intense darkness is called Mahātamaḥprabhā. These names are derived in this way. The word "Bhūmi" is used to indicate the specific dwelling place. Just as the celestial realms are not situated on earth, so too are the dwelling places of the Nārakas not situated on earth. What then? They are situated on earth.

To understand the support of these earths, the words "ghanāmbu, vāta, etc." are used. Dense water, wind, and space are the supports of these earths. Therefore, they are called "ghanāmbu vāta ākāśa pratiṣṭhāḥ". All these earths are supported by the dense ocean ring. The dense ocean ring is supported by the dense wind ring. The dense wind ring is supported by the thin wind ring.

Page #271:
---------------------------
[151
-3118368 ]
The third chapter is about the Tanuvatavalaya, which is supported by the Akasha. The Akasha is self-supported, as it is both the base and the supported. These three Valayas are each twenty thousand yojanas thick. The word 'Sapta' (seven) is used to negate other numbers. There are only seven Bhumi, not eight or nine. The word 'Adho'adhah' (below and below) is used to negate the possibility of them being situated horizontally.
8368. To determine whether the Narakas reside everywhere in these Bhumi or only in certain places, the sutra mentions 'Ghanambhu Matakashapratiṣṭhāḥ'. All these Bhumi are supported by the Ghanodadhivatavalaya. The Ghanodadhivatavalaya is supported by the Dhanavatavalaya. The Dhanavatavalaya is supported by the Tanuvatavalaya. The Tanuvatavalaya is supported by the Akasha, and the Akasha is self-supported, as it is both the base and the supported. These three Valayas are each twenty thousand yojanas thick. The word 'Sapta' (seven) is used to negate other numbers. There are only seven Bhumi, not eight or nine. These Bhumi are not situated horizontally. The word 'Adho'adhah' (below and below) is used to negate this possibility.
Special Note: There are two types of Akasha - Alokaakasha and Lokakasha. Lokakasha is situated in the middle of Alokaakasha. It is naturally formed, without beginning or end, and is filled with six substances. It is seven rajus wide in all directions, from north to south and from below to above. It is seven rajus wide from east to west. Then, it gradually narrows down to one raju wide at a height of seven rajus on both sides. Then, it gradually widens to five rajus wide at a height of ten and a half rajus on both sides. Then, it gradually narrows down to one raju wide at a height of fourteen rajus on both sides. From east to west, the shape of the Lokakasha appears like a human standing with both hands on the hips and legs spread out. The lower part appears like a seat, the middle part like a border, and the upper part like a crown. It has three parts - Adholok, Madhyalok, and Urdhvalok. In the middle of Madhyalok is the Meru mountain, which is one hundred and forty thousand yojanas high. The lower part of the Meru is Adholok, the upper part is Urdhvalok, and the middle part is Madhyalok, which is spread out diagonally in straight lines. Madhyalok is also called Tiryalok because of its diagonal spread. The current sutra discusses Adholok. It has seven Bhumi, which are situated one below the other, but they are not touching each other. There is an immeasurable distance of yojanas between each Bhumi. The names of these Bhumi are given in the sutra in order. These are their descriptive names. Ghamma, Vansa, Megha, Anjana, Arishta, Maghavi, and Madhavi are their proper names. The first Bhumi is one hundred and eighty thousand yojanas thick. The second is thirty-two thousand yojanas thick, the third is thirty-three thousand yojanas thick, the fourth is twenty-four thousand yojanas thick, the fifth is twenty thousand yojanas thick, the sixth is sixteen thousand yojanas thick, and the seventh is eight thousand yojanas thick. All these seven Bhumi are supported by Ghanodadhi, Dhanavat, Tanuvat, and Akasha. That is, each Bhumi is supported by Ghanodadhi, Ghanodadhi is supported by Dhanavat, Dhanavat is supported by Tanuvat, Tanuvat is supported by Akasha, and Akasha is self-supported.
$368. To determine whether the Narakas reside everywhere in these Bhumi or only in certain places, the next sutra says...

Page #272:
---------------------------
[152]
Sarvarthasiddhi
[31218361 In those, thirty lakhs, twenty-five lakhs, fifteen lakhs, ten lakhs, three lakhs, five less than one lakh and five Narakas, respectively. ||2|| 8 369. In those Ratnaprabha etc. lands, the number of Narakas is mentioned by this Sutra, respectively. In Ratnaprabha, there are thirty lakhs Narakas. In Sharkaraprabha, there are twenty-five lakhs Narakas. In Valukaprabha, there are fifteen lakhs Narakas. In Pankaprabha, there are ten lakhs Narakas. In Dhumaprabha, there are three lakhs Narakas. In Tamahprabha, there are five less than one lakh Narakas and in MahaTamahprabha, there are five Narakas. In Ratnaprabha, there are thirteen Naraka patalas. From there onwards, in the seventh land, there are two less Naraka patalas. Other details should be known from Lokanuyoga.
$ 370. Now, what is the special feature of the Narakas in those lands, for that, it is said:
In those lands, there are thirty lakhs, twenty-five lakhs, fifteen lakhs, ten lakhs, three lakhs, five less than one lakh and five Narakas, respectively. ||2||
8369. In those Ratnaprabha etc. lands, the number of Narakas is mentioned by this Sutra, respectively. In Ratnaprabha, there are thirty lakhs Narakas. In Sharkaraprabha, there are twenty-five lakhs Narakas. In Valukaprabha, there are fifteen lakhs Narakas. In Pankaprabha, there are ten lakhs Narakas. In Dhumaprabha, there are three lakhs Narakas. In Tamahprabha, there are five less than one lakh Narakas and in MahaTamahprabha, there are five Narakas. In Ratnaprabha, there are thirteen Naraka patalas. From there onwards, in the seventh land, there are two less Naraka patalas. Other details should be known from Lokanuyoga.
The special meaning is that the first seven Prithivis have already been mentioned. Out of them, the first Prithvi has three parts - Kharbhaga, Pankabhaga and Abbahul bhaga. Khar bhaga is the topmost. It has abundance of gems and is sixteen thousand yojanas thick. The second is Pankabhaga, its thickness is eighty-four thousand yojanas! And the third is Abbahul bhaga. Its thickness is eighty thousand yojanas. The dwelling places of the Narakis are called Narakas. In the first and second parts of Ratnaprabha land, there are no Narakas. They are in the third part. In this way, in the third part of the first land and in the remaining six lands, as much thickness as has been mentioned, leaving one thousand yojanas of land above and below, there are Narakas in the remaining middle part of all the seven lands. Their shape is of various types. Some are round, some are triangular, some are square and some are of uncertain shape. All these Naraka patalas are situated in order. Just as one layer of stone or soil is situated on another layer, in the same way, these patalas are. In the first land, these patalas are thirteen and in the subsequent lands, two patalas are less in order. One patala is attached to another patala. In these, there are Narakas. Naraka is the name of a well-like hole inside the earth. It is surrounded by earth on all sides, above and below. In these Narakas, the Naraki beings stay till the end of their life and suffer various kinds of pain there.
8370 To explain the special feature of the Narakis living in those lands, now the Sutra is said: - Saptamya Dwan Hoon Narak A. Di. 1, Di. 2. 2. - Prastara Heenaah. Itaro A. Di. 1. Di. 2. 2. Lokaniyogato Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #273:
---------------------------
## Hell-beings are constantly characterized by the worst karmic tendencies, their consequences, bodies, pain, and transformations. || 3 ||

8371. The karmic tendencies and their consequences have been explained before. The term "worst" indicates that these karmic tendencies are worse than those experienced by beings in the animal realm, and they are progressively worse in each lower realm. The word "constant" refers to the continuous nature of these karmic tendencies. Hell-beings are constantly characterized by the worst karmic tendencies, their consequences, bodies, pain, and transformations. For example, in the first and second realms, the karmic tendency is "pigeon-like" (kapotika). In the third realm, the karmic tendency is "pigeon-like" in the upper part and "blue" (nila) in the lower part. In the fourth realm, the karmic tendency is "blue". In the fifth realm, the karmic tendency is "blue" in the upper part and "black" (krishna) in the lower part. In the sixth realm, the karmic tendency is "black". And in the seventh realm, the karmic tendency is "supremely black" (paramkrishna). These karmic tendencies are called "material" (dravya) and remain constant throughout their lifespan. However, the "mental" (bhaava) karmic tendencies change every moment. The consequences of these karmic tendencies are the five senses: touch, taste, smell, sight, and sound. These consequences are caused by specific karmic fields and are extremely painful, making them the worst. The bodies of hell-beings are extremely deformed and ugly due to the emergence of the "bad name" (ashubha naama) karma. Their bodies are distorted, resembling a "hump" (hunda), and are difficult to look at. Their height in the first realm is seven bows, three hands, and six fingers. In each lower realm, their height doubles. Due to the emergence of the "unbearable" (asataavedaniya) karma within them, hell-beings experience intense pain caused by external factors like heat and cold, which have been present since time immemorial. In the first, second, third, and fourth realms, the hell-beings experience only heat-related pain. In the fifth realm, the upper two hundred thousand hells experience heat-related pain, while the lower one hundred thousand hells experience cold-related pain. In the sixth and seventh realms, the hell-beings experience only cold-related pain. Hell-beings think, "We will do good deeds," but they continue to perform the worst actions. They think, "We will create causes for happiness," but they only create causes for suffering.

Page #274:
---------------------------
## 154] Sarvarthasiddhi

[314 8372 They produce suffering only because of the cause of suffering. These beings should be known as increasingly inauspicious, one after the other. 6372.  Because the suffering of these hell beings is caused by heat and cold, and also in other ways, the following sutra explains:

**They are afflicted by suffering produced by each other. ||4||**

F373. How is suffering produced by each other? Hell beings, due to their knowledge of the cycle of births and deaths, have a false perception of reality, which is called "vibhanga" (disintegration) knowledge. Because of this knowledge, they understand the causes of suffering from afar and experience suffering. When they come closer, they see each other and their anger flares up.  Remembering their past lives, their hatred intensifies.  Like dogs and jackals, they attack each other.  They create weapons from their own actions, such as swords, daggers, axes, arrows, bows, tomars (a specific type of weapon), spears, and hammers.  They inflict intense suffering on each other by piercing, cutting, chopping, and biting with these weapons and their own hands, feet, and teeth.

8374. Are these the only causes of suffering, or are there others? The following sutra explains:

**They are also afflicted by suffering produced by the afflicted Asuras, up to the fourth bhumi. ||5||**

**Note:** The commentary here explains that the "leshya" (subtle body) changes within a moment, with two different types of "leshya" being mentioned.  This means that the "leshya" itself doesn't change, but rather its intensity changes according to the "yoga" (spiritual practice) and "kṣaya" (passions).  This is because there is no rule that every hell being must have the same "yoga" and "kṣaya."  However, according to their lower, middle, or higher time periods, or according to their substance, field, and state, their "yoga" and "kṣaya" change according to a rule.  Since "leshya" is the name for the tendency of "yoga" influenced by "kṣaya," it also changes within its own limits as "yoga" and "kṣaya" change.  Only where the "kapota" (pigeon) "leshya" is mentioned as the lowest level, it remains the same.  It doesn't change into the middle or higher level of "kapota" "leshya."  Similarly, where the "param kṛṣṇa" (supreme black) "leshya" is mentioned, it remains the same and doesn't change into another "leshya."  The rest of the explanation is straightforward.

6372. The following sutra explains whether the suffering of these hell beings is only caused by heat and cold, or if there are other types of suffering:

**They are also afflicted by suffering produced by each other. ||4||**

8373. The question arises: How do hell beings inflict suffering on each other? The answer is that hell beings have knowledge of the cycle of births and deaths, which is called "vibhanga" (disintegration) knowledge, arising from false perception.  Due to this knowledge, they understand the causes of suffering from afar and experience suffering.  When they come closer, they see each other and their anger flares up.  Remembering their past lives, their hatred intensifies.  Like dogs and jackals, they attack each other.  They create weapons from their own actions, such as swords, daggers, axes, arrows, bows, tomars (a specific type of weapon), spears, and hammers.  They inflict intense suffering on each other by piercing, cutting, chopping, and biting with these weapons and their own hands, feet, and teeth.

5374. The following sutra explains whether these are the only causes of suffering, or if there are others:

**They are also afflicted by suffering produced by the afflicted Asuras, up to the fourth bhumi. ||5||**

**Note:**  "Nārakāṇam?" means "Hell beings?"  "Bhavamu" means "cycle of births and deaths," "Tā" means "they," and "Nā" means "no."

Page #275:
---------------------------
-316 $ 376] Chapter Three
[155 6375. The *asuras* who throw others (paranitayasuras) are those who have the *karma* called *devagati* and *namakarma*. Due to the intense suffering they experienced in their previous birth, they have accumulated *papakarma* (negative karma) which, upon its fruition, causes them constant suffering. They are called *san-klishta* (afflicted) *asuras*. The epithet *san-klishta* does not imply that all *asuras* inflict suffering on the inhabitants of hell. Who then? Only some, like *Ambavareesha* and others. The epithet "prior to the fourth" is used to indicate the extent of the *avadhi* (clairvoyance). This is to show that the *san-klishta* *asuras* are the cause of suffering only in the first three earths, not beyond. The "c" (cha) in the sutra is used to indicate the collection of the aforementioned causes of suffering. They inflict suffering on the inhabitants of hell by means such as feeding them molten iron, embracing them with red-hot iron pillars, making them climb and descend the *Kuta* *Shalmali* tree, striking them with iron hammers, cutting them with knives and swords, pouring hot oil on them, cooking them in oil, roasting them in a pot, immersing them in the *Vaitarani* river, crushing them with a machine, etc. Even when their bodies are dismembered by cutting, piercing, etc., they do not die prematurely. Why? Because their lifespan is not diminished. 6376. If this is so, then tell us the lifespan of the inhabitants of hell. To this, the sutra says: The lifespan of beings in hell is, in order of their superior status, one, three, seven, fifteen, seventeen, twenty-two, and thirty *sagaropama* (ocean-like). ||6|| 8375. In the *namakarma* called *devagati*, there is a *namakarma* called *asura* which, upon its fruition, causes the *paranitayasuras* to throw others. Due to the intense suffering they experienced in their previous birth, they have accumulated *papakarma* (negative karma) which, upon its fruition, causes them constant suffering. They are called *san-klishta* (afflicted) *asuras*. The sutra, although it uses the epithet *san-klishta* for *asuras*, does not imply that all *asuras* inflict suffering on the inhabitants of hell. Only some, like *Ambavareesha* and others, inflict suffering. The epithet "prior to the fourth" is used to indicate the extent of the *avadhi* (clairvoyance). This is to show that the *san-klishta* *asuras* are the cause of suffering only in the first three earths, not beyond. The "c" (cha) in the sutra is used to indicate the collection of the aforementioned causes of suffering. They inflict suffering on the inhabitants of hell by means such as feeding them molten iron, embracing them with red-hot iron pillars, making them climb and descend the *Kuta* *Shalmali* tree, striking them with iron hammers, cutting them with knives and swords, pouring hot oil on them, cooking them in oil, roasting them in a pot, immersing them in the *Vaitarani* river, crushing them with a machine, etc. Even when their bodies are dismembered by cutting, piercing, etc., they do not die prematurely. Why? Because their lifespan is not diminished.
Special Note: The inhabitants of hell are inherently cruel. They become enraged at the sight of each other and begin to kill and maim each other. Their bodies are *vaikriyika* (changeable), so they can assume the form of various weapons and other things to inflict pain on other inhabitants of hell. Even the gods can go to the third hell, so these *asuras* also provoke them into fighting each other and take pleasure in watching them kill each other. However, not all gods do this, but only some *asura* *kumara* gods, like *Ambavareesha* and others. Even though all this happens, the inhabitants of hell do not die prematurely. This is something important to know.
6376. If this is so, then tell us the lifespan of the inhabitants of hell. To this, the sutra says: The lifespan of beings in hell is, in order of their superior status, one, three, seven, fifteen, seventeen, twenty-two, and thirty *sagaropama* (ocean-like). ||6|| 1. *Sammani* *Sam-bhaavi* - Mu. 2. *Klishta* *San-klishta* *asuras* - Mu. 3. -*Pusha* *svāt* - Ā. Di. Di. 2.

Page #276:
---------------------------
## 156]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[316 § 377
8377. The word 'yathākramam' is carried forward. In those hells, the positions of the earth-like beings are related to the number of oceans. In Ratnaprabhā, the highest position is one ocean-like. In Śarkarāprabhā, it is three ocean-like. In Valukāprabhā, it is seven ocean-like. In Pankaprabhā, it is ten ocean-like. In Dhūmaprabhā, it is seventeen ocean-like. In Tamaḥprabhā, it is twenty-two ocean-like. In Mahātamaḥprabhā, it is thirty-three ocean-like. The word 'parā' means 'highest'. The word 'sattvānām' is used to negate the earth. The meaning is that this is the position of the beings in the earths, not of the earths themselves.
$378. The description of the lower world, spread over seven earths, has been given. Now the Tiryanchloka should be described. Why is it called Tiryanchloka? Because countless islands and oceans, up to the ocean of Svayambhūramana, are situated in a particular way, extending sideways, hence the name Tiryanchloka. What are situated sideways? To explain this, the next sūtra says:
Jambūdvīpa, etc., are islands with auspicious names, and Lavaṇoda, etc., are oceans with auspicious names. ||17||
8379. Jambūdvīpa, etc., are islands. Lavaṇoda, etc., are oceans. Those which have auspicious names in the world, are named after them. For example, Jambūdvīpa is an island, Lavaṇoda is an ocean, Dhātakīkhaṇḍa is an island, Kāloda is an ocean, Puṣkaravara is an island, Puṣkaravara is an ocean, Vāruṇīvara is an island, Vāruṇīvara is an ocean, Kṣīravara is an island, Kṣīravara is an ocean, Ghṛtavāra is an island, Ghṛtavāra is an ocean, Ikṣuvāra is an island, Ikṣuvāra is an ocean, Nandīśvaravara is an island, Nandīśvaravara is an ocean, Aruṇavara is an island, and Aruṇavara is an ocean. In this way, countless islands and oceans, up to the ocean of Svayambhūramana, should be known.
8380. To explain the specific details of their circumference, arrangement, and structure, the next sūtra says:
8377. The word 'yathākramam' is carried forward. In those hells, the positions of the earth-like beings are related to the number of oceans. In Ratnaprabhā, the highest position is one ocean-like. In Śarkarāprabhā, it is three ocean-like. In Valukāprabhā, it is seven ocean-like. In Pankaprabhā, it is ten ocean-like. In Dhūmaprabhā, it is seventeen ocean-like. In Tamaḥprabhā, it is twenty-two ocean-like. In Mahātamaḥprabhā, it is thirty-three ocean-like. The word 'parā' means 'highest'. The word 'sattvānām' is used to negate the earth. The meaning is that this is the position of the beings in the earths, not of the earths themselves.
8378. The description of the lower world, spread over seven earths, has been given. Now the Tiryanchloka should be described. Why is it called Tiryanchloka? Because countless islands and oceans, up to the ocean of Svayambhūramana, are situated in a particular way, extending sideways, hence the name Tiryanchloka. What are situated sideways? To explain this, the next sūtra says:
Jambūdvīpa, etc., are islands with auspicious names, and Lavaṇoda, etc., are oceans with auspicious names. ||17||
8379. Jambūdvīpa, etc., are islands. Lavaṇoda, etc., are oceans. Those which have auspicious names in the world, are named after them. For example, Jambūdvīpa is an island, Lavaṇoda is an ocean, Dhātakīkhaṇḍa is an island, Kāloda is an ocean, Puṣkaravara is an island, Puṣkaravara is an ocean, Vāruṇīvara is an island, Vāruṇīvara is an ocean, Kṣīravara is an island, Kṣīravara is an ocean, Ghṛtavāra is an island, Ghṛtavāra is an ocean, Ikṣuvāra is an island, Ikṣuvāra is an ocean, Nandīśvaravara is an island, Nandīśvaravara is an ocean, Aruṇavara is an island, and Aruṇavara is an ocean. In this way, countless islands and oceans, up to the ocean of Svayambhūramana, should be known.
8380. To explain the specific details of their circumference, arrangement, and structure, the next sūtra says:
1. What are those sideways - A. V. 1

Page #277:
---------------------------
## Chapter Three

**8381.** The phrase "द्विद्वि" indicates that the diameters of the islands and oceans are doubled. The diameter of the first island is doubled to form the diameter of the salt ocean. The diameter of the salt ocean is doubled to form the diameter of the second island. The diameter of the second island is doubled to form the diameter of the second ocean. Thus, the diameters of all these islands and oceans are doubled. The phrase "पूर्वपूर्व परिक्षेपिण:" indicates that they are arranged like villages and cities, one surrounding the other. The phrase "वलयाकृतय:" indicates that they are not square or any other shape.

**8382.** Now, the diameter of Jambudvipa, the first island, must be described, because the diameters of the other islands and oceans are derived from it. Therefore, the next verse says:

**8383.** In the middle of all these, there is Jambudvipa, which is circular, has a diameter of one hundred thousand yojanas, and has Mount Meru at its center.

**Explanation:** The word "तन्मध्ये" means "in the middle of them." The question arises: "In the middle of whom?" The answer is: "In the middle of the aforementioned islands and oceans." Mount Meru is called "naabhi" because it is located at the center, which is the meaning of "naabhi." This means that Jambudvipa is circular, has a diameter of one hundred thousand yojanas, and has Mount Meru at its center. The question arises: "Why is it called Jambudvipa?" The answer is: "It is called Jambudvipa because it is associated with the Jambudvipa tree." In Uttarakuru, there is a Jambudvipa tree, which is eternal, made of earth, natural, and surrounded by other trees. This island is named after that tree.

**Note:** We have discussed the lower world. Next, we will discuss the middle world.

Page #278:
---------------------------
## 1581 Sarvarthasiddhi

**[3110.8 3845 384.  There, in Jambudvipa, there are seven regions divided by six Kulaparvatas. What are they? This is explained further:**

**Bharatavarsha, Haimavatavarsha, Harivarsha, Videhavarsha, Ramyakavarsha, Hairanyavata Varsha and Airavatavarsha are the seven regions. ||10||**

**[8385. The names of the regions, like Bharat, etc., have been in existence since time immemorial and are without any specific cause. Where is Bharatavarsha located?  Bharatavarsha is located in the south of the Himavan mountain, between the three oceans, shaped like a raised bow. It is divided into six parts by the Vijaya, Ganga and Sindhu rivers.  Haimavatavarsha is located to the north of the Ksudra Himavan, to the south of the Mahahimavan, and between the eastern and western oceans. Harivarsha is located to the south of Nishdha, to the north of the Mahahimavan, and between the eastern and western oceans. Videhavarsha is located to the north of Nishdha, to the south of Nila, and between the eastern and western oceans. Ramyakavarsha is located to the north of Nila, to the south of Rukmina, and between the eastern and western oceans. Rukmina is located to the north of Shikhraprithvi, in the upper part.  There are countless islands and oceans, one after another, in a circular shape.  Jambudvipa is located in the middle of all these.  There is no other island or ocean between it and the others.  Although all the islands and oceans are circular, they are all circular like a bead, while this one is circular like a plate.  Its diameter is one lakh yojanas.  In the exact middle of it is Mount Meru.  It is one lakh forty thousand yojanas high.  One thousand yojanas of it are underground.  The peak is at forty yojanas, and the remaining ninety-nine thousand yojanas are from the flat surface to the peak.  The diameter of Mount Meru at the base is ten thousand yojanas.  It gradually decreases as it goes up.  The diameter of the base increases in the same proportion as it decreases at the top.  Mount Meru has three sections.  The first section is five hundred yojanas from the ground, the second is sixty-two thousand five hundred yojanas, and the third is thirty-six thousand yojanas.  There is a cut at the end of each section.  The diameter of one side of the cut is five hundred yojanas.  The diameter of the last cut is only six yojanas less.  It is adorned with four forests, one on the ground and three on these three cuts.  Their names are Bhadra, Nandana, Saumanasa and Panduka, in order.  After the first and second cuts, Mount Meru goes straight up, and then it starts to decrease gradually.  There are sixteen Chaityalayas in each of the four forests, four in each direction.  In the Panduka forest, there are four Panduka stones in each direction, on which the Tirthankaras born in that region are anointed.  Its color is yellow. ]**

Page #279:
---------------------------
-3112 8388] Chapter Three
[159 The Hairanyavata region is situated between the western sea and the eastern and western seas, with Rukmi to the north and Shikhari to the south. The Airavata region is situated to the north of Shikhari and between the three seas, divided into six parts by Vijayardhana and Rakta Raktoda. 8386. It has been said that there are six Kulaparvatas. Who are they and how are they arranged? To answer this, the following verse says:
The six Kulaparvatas, which divide the regions, are Himavan, Mahahimavan, Nishadha, Nila, Rukmi, and Shikhari, extending from east to west. ||1|| 8387. These mountains are called Vibhajin because they divide the regions. The phrase "extending from east to west" means that they touch the salt sea with their eastern and western ends. Himavan and the others are names that have been in use since time immemorial and are without any specific reason. They are called Varshadhara Parvatas because they are responsible for the division of the regions. Where is Himavan? It is situated on the border of the Bharat and Haimavata regions. It is also called Kshudra Himavan and is one hundred yojanas high. Mahahimavan, which divides the Haimavata and Hari Varsha regions, is two hundred yojanas high. Nishadha, which is to the south of Videha and to the north of Hari Varsha, is four hundred yojanas high. The other three mountains, which divide their respective regions, should be understood in the same way. Their heights are four hundred, two hundred, and one hundred yojanas respectively. The depth of all these mountains is one-fourth of their height. 8 388. The following verse describes the specific colors of these mountains:
These six mountains are respectively the color of gold, silver, heated gold, vaidurya gem, silver, and gold. ||12|| 1. Sannivesho Hair- Mu. 2. -Vibhaktah Shat- Mu. 3. Simanyava- A., Di. 1, Di. 2. 4. Hari Vanshasya cha Vibha- A., Di. 1, Di. 21 5. -Chhrayah. Mahavidehasya Ja., Di. 1, Di. 21 6. -Tavyaam. Parvata- Mu.

Page #280:
---------------------------
## 160]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[3112 § 389
8389. These mountains, starting with Himavat, should be known by their colors in order. Himavat is *hemamaya*, the color of Chinese silk. Mahahimat is *arjunamaya*, white. Nishadha is *tapaniyamaya*, the color of heated gold, like the rising sun. Nila is *vaiduryamaya*, the color of lapis lazuli, like a peacock's neck. Rukmi is *rajatamaya*, white. Shikhara is *hemamaya*, the color of Chinese silk. 8390. To further describe these mountains, the next sutra says:
**Their sides are adorned with various jewels, and they are of equal width at the top, middle, and base.** ||13||
$ 391. These mountains have sides adorned with various jewels, possessing different colors, radiance, and other qualities. Therefore, they are called *mani-vichitra-parva*. The words "upari" etc. are used to eliminate the possibility of an undesirable shape. The word "cha" indicates the inclusion of the middle. The meaning is that their width at the base is the same as at the top and middle.
8392. The next sutra describes the lakes found in the middle of these mountains:
**On top of them are, in order, the lakes Padma, Mahapadma, Tiginchha, Kesari, Mahapuṇḍarīka, and Puṇḍarīka.** ||14||
8393. These six lakes, Padma, Mahapadma, Tiginchha, Kesari, Mahapuṇḍarīka, and Puṇḍarīka, should be known in order, on top of Himavat and the other mountains.
$ 394. To describe the specific shape of the first lake, the next sutra says:
1. *tadvisheshpratipattyarthamaha* mu. 2. -*shtasya samstha-* mu.

Page #281:
---------------------------
-3118 § 401]
Chapter Three
The first lake is one thousand yojanas long and half that width. ||15||
$ 395. The Padma lake is one thousand yojanas long from east to west and five hundred yojanas wide from north to south. Its bottom is made of vajra and its banks are adorned with various jewels and gold.
8396. To explain the depth, this sutra is said:
It is ten yojanas deep. ||16||
8397. Avagaha, adha pravesha, and nimnata are synonyms. The depth of the Padma lake is ten yojanas, this is the meaning of the sutra.
8398. What is in the middle of it?
There is a lotus of one yojana in the middle of it. ||17||
8399. The word 'yojana' in the sutra should be taken as one yojana. The meaning is that the lotus leaf is one krośa long and its stalk is two krośas wide, therefore the lotus is one yojana long and one yojana wide. The stalk of this lotus rises two krośas above the water level and its leaves are of the same thickness. This is how the lotus should be understood.
8400. Now, to explain the length etc. of other lakes and lotuses, the following sutra is said:
-

The next lakes and lotuses are double in size. ||18||
§ 401. The word 'tat' in the sutra refers to both the lake and the lotus. The sutra says 'tadvigunadviguna' to indicate that the next lakes and lotuses are double in size. Question - Double in comparison to what? Answer - In comparison to the length etc. 1.   gaha. tanmadhye yojanam a, di. 1, di. 2 1 2. tadvigunastadvigunast- mu. 3. jnanartham mu. 4. - padmahrdah mu.

Page #282:
---------------------------
## 162]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[3119 8 402hradaḥ. Tasyā dvigunāyāmavikara bhādagaha ritariḍ chho' hradaḥ. Purakarāṇi ca. Kim? Dvigunāni digunānītyabhisambadhyate.
6 402. Tannivāsinīnāṁ devīnāṁ saṁjñājīvitaparivārapratipādanārthamahātanivāsinyo devyaḥ śrīhīdhṛtikīrtibuddhilaksmyah palyopamasthitayaḥ
sasāmānikapariṣatkaḥ. ||19|| 8403. Teṣu puṣkareṣu kaṇikāmadhyadeśaniveśinaḥ śaradvimala pūrṇacandradyutiharāḥ krośāyāmaḥ krośārddhaviṣkambhā deśonakośotsedhāḥ prāsādāḥ. Teṣu nivasantītyevaṁśīlāstannivāsinyaḥ, devyaḥ śrīhṛdhṛtikotibuddhilaksmīsaṁjñikāsteṣu padmādisiṣu yathākrama veditavyāḥ. 'Palyopamasthitayaḥ' ityane nāyuṣaḥ pramāṇamuktam. Samāne sthāne bhavāḥ sāmānikāḥ. Sāmānikāśca pariṣadśca sāmānikapariṣadaḥ. Saha sāmānikapariṣadbhirvartaṁti iti sasāmānikapariṣatkaḥ. Tasyā padmasya parivārapadameṣa prāsādānāmapari sāmānikāḥ pariṣadśca vasanti.
8 404. Yakābhiḥ saridbhistāni kṣetrāṇi pravibhaktāni tā ucyante  gaṁgāsiṁdhurorohidrohitāsyāhariddharikāntāsītāsitodānārīnarakāntā
suvarṇarūpyakūlārktārktoudaḥ saritas tanmadhyagāḥ. ||20|| 8405. Sarito na vāpyaḥ. Tāḥ kimantara utā samīpā iti? Aha tanmadhyagāḥ teṣāṁ apeksā. Padma tālābakī jo lambāī, vistāra aura gaherāī hai mahāpadma tālābakī lambāī, vistāra aura gaherāī issa dūnī hai. Issase tigiccha tālābakī lambāī, vistāra aura gaherāī dūnī hai. Śaṁkā-kamala kyā hai? Samādhāna-ve bhī lambāī ādikī apeksā dūne-dūne hai aisā yahāṁ sambandha karnā cāhie.
8402. Inmeṁ nivās karanevālī devīyonke nāṁ, āyu aura parivāra kā jñāna karāneke lie āge kā sūtra kahate haiṁ
Inmeṁ śrī, hrī, dhṛti, koti, buddhi aura lakṣmī ye devīyāṁ sāmānika aura pariṣad devonke sāth nivās kartī haiṁ. Tathā inakī āyu ek palyopama hai. ||19||
8403. In kamalonkī kaṇikāke madhyameṁ śaratkāliṁ nirmal pūrṇacandramakī kāntikō haranevālē ek kosa lambē, ādhā kosa cauṛē aura paun kosa ūṁcē mahal haiṁ. Unmeṁ nivās karanevālī śrī, hrī, dhṛti, kīrti, buddhi aura lakṣmī nāṁvālī devīyāṁ krama se padma ādi chha kamalonmeṁ jānana cāhie. Unkī sthiti ek palyopamakī hai' is padake dvārā unkī āyu kā pramāṇa kahā hai. Samān sthānameṁ jō hote haiṁ ve sāmānika kahalāte haiṁ. Sāmānika aura pariṣatk ye dev haiṁ. Ve devīyāṁ inake sāth rahtī haiṁ. Tātparya yah hai ki mukhya kamalake jō parivāra kamal haiṁ unake mahalonmeṁ sāmāni aura pariṣad jātikē dev rahte haiṁ.
8404. Jin nadiyōṁse kṣetronkā vibhāga huā hai ab un nadiyōṁkā kathana karaneke lie āge kā sūtra kahate haiṁ
In bharat ādi kṣetron meṁ-se gaṁgā, siṁdhu, rohit, rohitāsyā, harit, harikāntā, sītā, sītodā, nārī, narakāntā, suvarṇakūlā, rūpyakūlā, rakta aura raktoda nadiyāṁ bahī haiṁ. ||20||
8405. Ye nadiyāṁ haiṁ tālāb nahīṁ. Ve nadiyāṁ antarālse haiṁ yā pās-pās is bāt kā 1.-giṁcchhṛdaḥ mu.
]

Page #283:
---------------------------
[163
 3122 $ 408]
Chapter Three: The Middle of the Fields, the Middle of That Middle. Those that go through the middle of that middle are called *Tन्मध्यगाः*. All of them are brought together in one place to eliminate the possibility of confusion and to understand the specific direction.
From two pairs, the first ones are the ones that go east. ||21|| 8406. The phrase "from two pairs" implies that each pair of rivers is in one field, thus eliminating the possibility of all the rivers being in one place. The phrase "the first ones are the ones that go east" is meant to understand the specific direction. The rivers that are first are the ones that go east. They go east because they go to the eastern ocean. What is the basis for this eastward direction? It is based on the instructions given in the sutra. If this is the case, then the Ganga, Sindhu, and the other seven rivers would be the ones that go east. This is not a problem because the phrase "from two pairs" is relevant. We should understand that from each pair of rivers, the first one flows east and joins the eastern ocean.
8407. Now, to understand the specific direction of the other rivers, we say:
The rest go west. ||22|| 8408. The remaining rivers from each pair should be understood as the ones that go west. They are called *अपरगाः* because they go to the western ocean. Among them, the Ganga originates from the Padma lake and exits from the eastern gate. The Sindhu originates from the western gate. The Rohitasya originates from the northern gate. The Rohit originates from the Mahapadma lake and exits from the southern gate. The Harikanta originates from the northern gate. The Harit originates from the Tiginchha lake and exits from the southern gate. The Sitoda originates from the northern gate. The Kesari originates from the Kesari lake and exits from the southern gate. 1. *मध्यं तन्मध्यं तन्मध्येन* Mu. | *मध्यं तन्मध्येन* A., Di. 1, Di. 2. 2. *पूर्व जलधि* Mu. | 3. *अपाच्यतोरण-* A. 2, Di. 1, Di. 2, Ta., Na. |

Page #284:
---------------------------
## 164]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
-3123 § 412]
Sotoba. The Sita river originates from the Kesarihava Prabhava and exits from the Avachya Torana door. The Narakanta river originates from the Udicya Torana door. The Nari river originates from the Mahapuṇḍarīka Prabhava and exits from the Dakṣiṇa Torana door. The Rūpyakūla river originates from the Udicya Torana door. The Suvarṇakūla river originates from the Puṇḍarīka Prabhava and exits from the Avachya Torana door. The Rakta river originates from the Purva Torana door and the Raktoda river originates from the Prativyā Torana door.
8409. To explain the families of these rivers, the following sutra is stated:
The Ganga, Sindhu, and other rivers have fourteen thousand families each. || 23 ||
8410. Why is the term "Ganga, Sindhu, etc." used? It is used to include all rivers. Are these rivers already included in the previous discussion? This is not a valid concern, because according to the rule "the subsequent statement is either a regulation or a prohibition," only the rivers flowing westward would be included, which is not desirable. Therefore, the term "Ganga, Sindhu, etc." is used in the sutra. If only the term "Ganga, etc." was used, then only the rivers flowing eastward would be included, which is also not desirable. Therefore, the term "Ganga, Sindhu, etc." is used to include both types of rivers. Although the term "Ganga, Sindhu, etc." itself implies that these are rivers, the term "river" is used in the sutra to connect it with the phrase "twice, twice." The Ganga has fourteen thousand family rivers. Similarly, the Sindhu also has fourteen thousand family rivers. In this way, the family rivers further north are twice as many as the previous ones, up to Videha. Beyond Videha, the family rivers are half as many.
$ 411. To explain the extent of these regions, the following sutra is stated:
The Bharat region is five hundred twenty-six yojanas wide, plus six nineteenths of a yojana. || 25 || $ 412. Here, the phrase "five hundred twenty-six yojanas wide" is compounded in the commentary. 1. Apara Torana - Mu. 1 2. Pa. Ma. Bha., p. 335 3. Region twice, twice - Mu. 14. - more than those - Mu.

Page #285:
---------------------------
-3127 § 418]
Chapter Three
[165
Bharatavarsha is five hundred and twenty-six yojanas in extent. Is this its only extent? No, because one should add six-nineteenths of a yojana to its extent. § 413. To understand the specific diameters of the other regions, the following sutra is stated:
The regions from Varshadhara to Videha are twice and twice the extent of Bharatavarsha. ||25||
8414. 'Those whose extent is twice and twice that of Bharatavarsha are these, those whose extent is twice and twice that of Bharatavarsha. Which are they? Varshadhara and the regions up to Videha. Are all of them? No, because it is said, 'Videhaanta'.
§ 415. To explain how the northern regions are, the following sutra is stated:
The northern regions are equal to the southern regions. ||26||
§ 416. The northern regions, from Airawata to Nila, should be considered equal to the southern regions, from Bharatavarsha onwards. This peculiarity should be understood in all that has been said before. From this, the equality of the lakes and lotuses etc. should be inferred.
§ 417. Here, the questioner asks: In these aforementioned regions, from Bharatavarsha onwards, is the experience of humans etc. the same, or is there some difference? To answer this question, the following sutra is stated:
In Bharatavarsha and Airawata, there is increase and decrease in accordance with the six periods of Utsarpini and Avasarpini. ||27||
§ 418. In both the words 'vṛddhi' and 'hrasha', there is a karmadharaya compound. Question: In accordance with what? 1. 'Tato dviguṇo tā, nā.' 2. 'Tulyo'nubhavaḥ āho- tā., nā.' 3. '-yābhyām.' Kayoḥ mu.

Page #286:
---------------------------
1661
Sarvarthasiddhi
[31278418bhyām. Kayoḥ? Bharatarāvatayoḥ. Na tayoḥ kṣetrayoḥ khīhāsau staḥ; asambhavāt. Tatsthānām manuṣyāṇām vṛddhihāsau bhavataḥ. Athavādhīkaraṇanirdeśaḥ. Bharate Airāvate ca manuṣyāṇām vṛddhihrasāv iti. Kinkṛtau vṛddhihāsau? Anubhavāyuḥpramaṇādikṛtau. Anubhava upabhogaḥ, āyurjīvitaparimaṇam', pramaṇam śarīrotsedha ity evamādibhir vṛddhihrasau manuṣyāṇām bhavataḥ. Kihetuko punas tau? Kālahetuko. Sa ca kālo dvividhaḥ-utsarpiṇī avasarpiṇī ceti. Tadbhāvaḥ pratyekam ṣaṭ. Anvarthasamjñe caite. Anubhavādibhir utsarpaṇashīlā utsarpiṇī. Tairava avasarpaṇashīlā avasarpiṇī. Tatra avasarpiṇī ṣaḍvidhā-suṣamasuṣamā suṣamā suṣamaduṣṣamā duṣṣamasuṣamā duṣṣamā atiduṣṣamā ceti. Utsarpiṇyapi atiduṣṣamādya suṣamasuṣamāntā ṣaḍvidhaiva bhavati. Avasarpiṇyāḥ parimaṇam daśasāgaropamakoṭīkoṭayaḥ. Utsarpiṇyā api tāvatya eva. Sobhayo kalpa ityākhyāte. Tatra suṣamasuṣamā catasraḥ sāgaropamakoṭīkoṭayaḥ. Tavādī manuṣyā uttarakurumanuṣyatulyāḥ. Tataḥ kramena hānāu satyāṁ suṣamā bhavati tisraḥ sāgaropamakoṭīkoṭayaḥ. Tadādau manuṣyā harivarṣamanuṣyasamāḥ. Tataḥ kramena hānāu satyāṁ suṣamaduṣṣamā bhavati dve sāgaropamakoṭīkoṭi cau. Tadādī manuṣyā haimavatakamanuṣyasamāḥ. Tataḥ kramena hānī satyāṁ duṣṣamasuṣamā bhavati ekasāgaropamakoṭīkoṭī dvicaṭvāriṁśadvarṣasahasronā. Tadādau manuṣyā videhajanatulyā bhavanti. Tataḥ kramena hānāu satyāṁ duṣṣamā bhavati ekavṁśativṛṣasahasrāṇi. Tataḥ kramena hānāu satyāvṛddhi aura hras hota hai? Samādhān-utsarpiṇī aura avasarpiṇī sambandhī chha samayonko apeksha. Śaṅkā-kinakā chha samayonko apeksha vṛddhi aura hras hota hai? Samādhān-bharat aura airāvat kṣetraka. Isakā yah matalab nahīṁ ki un kṣetronkā vṛddhi aura hras hota hai, kyōṁki aisā honā asambhav hai. Kintu un kṣetronmeṁ rahanewale manuṣyonkā vṛddhi aura hās hota hai. Athavā, bharat rāvatayoḥ' ṣaṣṭhī vibhakti na hokar adhikaranmeṁ yah nirdeśa kiyā hai jisase is prakar arth hota hai ki bharat aura airāvat kṣetrameṁ manuṣyonko vṛddhi ora hras hota hai. Śaṅkā-yah vṛddhi aura hās kinimittak hota hai? Samādhān anubhava, āyu ora pramaṇ ādi nimittak hota hai. Anubhava upabhāgaka kahte hai, jāvat rahanek parimaṇako āyū kahte hai aura śarīrakī ūṁcāīko pramaṇ kahte hai. Is prakar ityādi kāraṇonse kā vṛddhi aura hras hota hai. Śaṅkā-ye vṛddhi-hras kis nimittase hote hai? Samādhān—ye kālake nimit se hote hai. Vah kāl do prakarakā hai-utsarpiṇī aura avasarpiṇī. Inmeṁ se pratyekake chha bhed hai. Ye donoṁ kāl sārtthak nāmavale hai. Jisameṁ manuṣyonke anubhav ādikī vṛddhi hotī hai vah utsarpiṇī kāl hai aura jisameṁ inakā hras hota hai vah avasarpiṇī hai. Avasarpiṇīke chha bhad hai-suṣamasuṣamā, suṣamā, suṣamaduṣṣamā, duṣṣamasuṣamā, duṣṣamā aura atiduṣṣamā. Isīprakar utsarpiṇī bhī atiduṣṣamāse lekar suṣamasuṣamā tak chha prakar kā hai. Avasarpiṇī kālka parimaṇam daś koḍākoḍī sāgaropama hai aura utsarpiṇoka bhī itanā hī hai. Ye donoṁ milkar ek kalpakāl kahe jate hai. Inmeṁ se suṣamasuṣamā cār koḍākoḍī sāgaropama pramaṇ hai. Isake prārammeṁ manuṣya uttarakuruke manuṣyonke samān hote hai. Phir kramese hānī honepar tīn koḍākoḍo sāgaropama pramaṇ suṣamā kāl prāpt hota hai. Isake prārammeṁ manuṣya harivarṣ ke manuṣyonke samān hote hai. Tadanantar kramese hānī honepar do koḍākoḍo sāgaropama pramaṇ suṣamaduṣamā kāl prāpt hota hai. Isake prārammeṁ manuṣya haimavatake manuṣyonke samān hote hai. Tadanantar kramese hānī hokar byālīs hazār varṣ kam ek koḍākoḍo sāgaropama pramaṇ duṣṣamasuṣam

Page #287:
---------------------------
## Chapter Three

[§ 422]
The duration of the Utsarpini is twenty-one thousand years. The Avasarpini should be understood in the reverse order. [§ 419] Now, to explain the state of other lands, the following Sutra is stated:
"The remaining lands are situated apart from these two." [28]
[§ 420] The Sutra uses the word "Taabhyaam" to refer to the Bharata and Airavata regions. The remaining lands are situated apart from these two. There is no Utsarpini or Avasarpini time in those regions.
[§ 421] Now, to explain whether the humans in these lands have equal lifespans or have some special characteristics, the following Sutra is stated:
"The humans in the Haimvata, Harivarsha, and Daivakuru regions have lifespans of one, two, and three Palya-upamas respectively." [29]
[§ 422] Those born in the Haimvata region are called Haimvatakas. Here, the word "Haimvata" is suffixed with the "Vun" suffix to form the word "Haimvataka," which signifies humans. Similarly, the words "Harivarshaka" and "Daivakuruka" should be understood in the same way. There are three Haimvatakas, etc., and three Ekas, etc. Here, their connection is made in order, which means that the humans in the Haimvata region have a lifespan of one Palya-upamas. The humans in the Harivarsha region have a lifespan of two Palya-upamas, and the humans in the Daivakuru region have a lifespan of three Palya-upamas. In the two and a half islands, there are five Haimvata regions where there is always Sushma. There, the humans have a lifespan of one Palya-upamas, a height of two thousand Dhanus, their food is taken at intervals of one day, and their body color is like a blue lotus. In the five Harivarsha regions, there is always Sushma time. There, the humans have a lifespan of two Palya-upamas, a height of four thousand Dhanus, their food is taken at intervals of two days, and their body color is white like a conch shell. In the five Daivakuru regions, there is always Sushmasushma time. There, the humans have a lifespan of three Palya-upamas, a height of six thousand Dhanus, their food is taken at intervals of three...

Page #288:
---------------------------
[168] Sarvarthasiddhi
[31308423 In that, the humans of the Stri-Palya-Upamā-yuṣa are 6,000 dhanuṣa tall, eat eight times a day, and have the color of gold. 8 423. Now, to speak of the state of the northern regions, it is said:
Thus, the northern ones. ||30|| 8424. Just as the southern regions have been explained, so too should the northern regions be understood. The Hairanyavata are equal to the Haimavata. The Ramya are equal to the Harivarṣa. The Daiva-Kuru and Uttara-Kuru are said to be the same. 8 425. Now, to speak of the state of those who reside in the Videhas, it is said:
In the Videhas, there are humans with a countable lifespan. ||31|| 6426. 'In all the Videhas, there are humans with a countable lifespan. There, the time is always in the state of the end of the Suṣama-Duṣṣama. The humans are 500 dhanuṣa tall. They eat daily. Their highest lifespan is one purva-koṭi years, and their lowest lifespan is one antarmūhurta. In relation to this, a gāthā is recited:
"One purva-koṭi is the measure, seventy lakh crore, and fifty-six thousand crore years should be known." 8427. The extent of the Bharata has been spoken of. Now, to explain it in another way, it is said:
The extent of the Bharata is one ninetieth of the Jambudvipa. ||32|| 8428. One ninetieth of the Jambudvipa, which is one lakh yojana in extent, is the extent of the Bharata, and the color of their bodies is like gold.
8 423. Now, to speak of the state of the northern regions, it is said:
The north is the same as the south. ||30||
8424. Just as the southern regions have been explained, so too should the northern regions be understood. The Hairanyavata are equal to the Haimavata. The Ramya are equal to the Harivarṣa. The Daiva-Kuru and Uttara-Kuru are said to be the same.
8 425. Now, to speak of the state of those who reside in the Videhas, it is said:
In the Videhas, there are humans with a countable lifespan. ||31||
8426. In all the Videhas, there are humans with a countable lifespan. There, the time is always in the state of the end of the Suṣama-Duṣṣama. The humans are 500 dhanuṣa tall. They eat daily. Their highest lifespan is one purva-koṭi years, and their lowest lifespan is one antarmūhurta. In relation to this, a gāthā is recited:
"One purva-koṭi is the measure, seventy lakh crore, and fifty-six thousand crore years should be known."
8427. The extent of the Bharata has been spoken of. Now, to explain it in another way, it is said:
The extent of the Bharata is one ninetieth of the Jambudvipa. ||32||
8428. One ninetieth of the Jambudvipa, which is one lakh yojana in extent, is the extent of the Bharata, and the color of their bodies is like gold. 
1. In all the five great Videhas. || 2. The time is always in the state of the end of the Suṣama-Duṣṣama, etc. || 3. There is a relation to this, etc. || 4. -ḍīṇaṃ. || 70560000000000 It has been said, etc.

Page #289:
---------------------------
## Chapter Three

**169. Description:** The description is the same as before. It has been said that the Jambudvipa is surrounded by a Vedika. Beyond that is the Lavanasamudra, a sea with a circumference of two hundred thousand yojanas. Beyond that is the Dhaataki-khanda, an island with a circumference of four hundred thousand yojanas.

**8429. To understand the number of years, etc., the following sutra is given:**

The Dhaataki-khanda has twice the number of regions and mountains, etc., as the Jambudvipa. ||33||

**8430.** The repetition of the regions like Bharat, etc., is intended here.

**Question:** Why is the suffix "suc" used in the sutra?

**Answer:** The suffix "suc" is used to indicate the repetition of the action that is being added to the sentence. For example, in the sentence "This palace is twice as big," the suffix "suc" indicates that the palace is two-storied. Similarly, in the Dhaataki-khanda, the suffix "suc" indicates that the regions like Bharat, etc., are twice as big.

**Explanation:** The Dhaataki-khanda is divided into two parts, the eastern Dhaataki-khanda and the western Dhaataki-khanda, by two mountains called Ishvaakara, which are shaped like arrows and touch the Lavanasamudra and the Kalodaka at their ends. These mountains run from south to north. In the middle of these two parts, there are two Mandaras, or Meru mountains. On both sides of these Mandaras are the regions like Bharat, etc., and the mountains like Himavan, etc. Thus, the number of regions and mountains in the Dhaataki-khanda is twice that of the Jambudvipa. For example, there are two Bharats, two Himavans, etc. The circumference of the Himavan, etc., in the Dhaataki-khanda is twice that of the Jambudvipa. These mountains are situated in the middle of the regions, like the spokes of a wheel. The regions are shaped like the holes in a wheel. In the Jambudvipa, there is a Jambudvipa tree. In the Dhaataki-khanda, there is a Dhaataki tree with its family of trees. The island is named Dhaataki-khanda because of this tree. The Kalodaka sea surrounds this island. Its shore looks as if it has been cut by a tank. The extent of the Bharat region is one-eighth of the total extent of the Dhaataki-khanda, which is five hundred twenty-six and six-nineteenths yojanas.

Page #290:
---------------------------
[170] Sarvarthasiddhi
[3134 $431 yojanashatasahasravalayavikambhah. Kalovaparikshepi Pushkaradvipah shodashayोजनशतसहस्रवलयavishkambhah. 8431. Tatra dvipaambhonishvivishkambhadvigunaparichluptivaddhatakokhandavarshadi dvigunavriddhiprasange visheshavधारणार्थमाह
Pushkaradde cha ||34|| 8432. Kim. Dvirityanuvartate. Kimapeksha dviraavritti? Jambudvipabharatahimavavadyapecksayeev. Kuta? Vyakhyanatah. Yatha dhatakikhande himavadadinaam vishkambhastatha pushkarah himavadadinaam vishkambho dviguna iti vyakhyayate. Namani tanyeev, isvakari mandarau cha purvavat. Yatra' jambuvrikshastatra pushkaram saparivaaram. Tata ev tasyadvipasya naam rudham pushkaradvipa iti. Ath katham pushkaradhasamjna. Manushottarashailen vibhaktarthattvatpushkaradhasamjna.
8433. Atraah kimartham jambudvipahimavadadisamkhya dviraavritta pushkarache kathyate, na punah kritsna ev pushkaradvipe. Ityatrauchyate
Pranmanushottaranmanushyaah ||35|| 8434. Pushkaradvipabahumadhyadeshabhagi valayavritto manushottaro naam shaila. Tasmatpraagev manushya na bahiriti. Tato na bahi purvoktkshetravibhago'sti. Nasmaaduttaram kadaachidapi vidyadhara 

[170] Sarvarthasiddhi
[3134 $431 yojanashatasahasravalayavikambhah. Kalovaparikshepi Pushkaradvipah shodashayोजनशतसहस्रवलयavishkambhah. 8431. Tatra dvipaambhonishvivishkambhadvigunaparichluptivaddhatakokhandavarshadi dvigunavriddhiprasange visheshavधारणार्थमाह
Pushkaradde cha ||34|| 8432. Kim. Dvirityanuvartate. Kimapeksha dviraavritti? Jambudvipabharatahimavavadyapecksayeev. Kuta? Vyakhyanatah. Yatha dhatakikhande himavadadinaam vishkambhastatha pushkarah himavadadinaam vishkambho dviguna iti vyakhyayate. Namani tanyeev, isvakari mandarau cha purvavat. Yatra' jambuvrikshastatra pushkaram saparivaaram. Tata ev tasyadvipasya naam rudham pushkaradvipa iti. Ath katham pushkaradhasamjna. Manushottarashailen vibhaktarthattvatpushkaradhasamjna.
8433. Atraah kimartham jambudvipahimavadadisamkhya dviraavritta pushkarache kathyate, na punah kritsna ev pushkaradvipe. Ityatrauchyate
Pranmanushottaranmanushyaah ||35|| 8434. Pushkaradvipabahumadhyadeshabhagi valayavritto manushottaro naam shaila. Tasmatpraagev manushya na bahiriti. Tato na bahi purvoktkshetravibhago'sti. Nasmaaduttaram kadaachidapi vidyadhara 

**English Translation:**

[170] Sarvarthasiddhi
[3134 The circumference of the Kalodaka is 431,000 yojanas. The Pushkaradvipa, surrounded by the Kalodaka, has a circumference of 1,600,000 yojanas. 8431. In this context, the size of the Dvipa and the oceans is doubled progressively. Similarly, the size of the Dhataki-khanda, the Dvipa, and other regions is doubled. To clarify this, the following sutra is stated:
"There are the same number of regions and mountains in Pushkarardha." ||34||
8432. Here, the word "dvi" is repeated. Question: To what is this repetition of "dvi" referring? Answer: It is referring to the Jambudvipa, Bharata, Himavan, and other regions and mountains. Question: How is this understood? Answer: From the explanation. Just as the size of the Himavan and other mountains in the Dhataki-khanda is stated, so too is the size of the Himavan and other mountains in Pushkarardha doubled. The names are the same. There are two Isvakara and two Mandara mountains, as before. Where there is the Jambudvipa, there is the Pushkaradvipa with its family of trees. Therefore, the name of this Dvipa is established as Pushkaradvipa. Question: How did this Dvipa get the name Pushkarardha? Answer: Due to the division of the Dvipa by the Manushottara mountain, half of the Dvipa is called Pushkarardha.
8433. Here, the questioner asks: Why is the number of the Himavan and other mountains in the Jambudvipa doubled in Pushkarardha, and not in the entire Pushkaradvipa? To answer this question, the following sutra is stated:
"Humans are only present before the Manushottara mountain." ||35||
8434. In the exact middle of the Pushkaradvipa, there is a circular mountain called Manushottara, like a peak. Humans are only present before this mountain, not beyond it. Therefore, there is no division of the regions mentioned earlier beyond the Manushottara mountain. There are no Vidyadharas beyond this mountain, and 

1. -pekshayav. Jambudvipatpushkarardhe dhau bharato dhau himavanti, ityādi. Kuta mu., di. 1, di. 2, ā. । 2. Patra jambudvipe jambū- mu., ki., di. 2, ā.। 3. Tasyadvipasyaanurudham pushkaradīpa iti naam. Ab mu.। 

1. -pekshayav. Jambudvi

Page #291:
---------------------------
[171
 -3136 6 435]
Chapter Three: Even those humans who have attained **riddhi** (spiritual power) go elsewhere, except for those born in **upapada** (a specific region) or those who have attained **samudghāta** (a specific spiritual state). Therefore, this name **Mānuṣottara** (above humans) is meaningful. In this way, humans should be known in the **Jambūdvīpa** (a mythical island) and the two and a half other islands, and in the two oceans. They are of two types: **Ārya** (noble) and **Mleccha** (non-noble). ||36|| 8435. Those who are considered by qualities or by those who possess qualities are called **Ārya**. They are of two types: **riddhi-prāpta Ārya** (Ārya who have attained **riddhi**) and **anṛddhi-prāpta Ārya** (Ārya who have not attained **riddhi**). **Anṛddhi-prāpta Ārya** are of five types: **kṣetra-ārya** (Ārya by virtue of their land), **jāti-ārya** (Ārya by virtue of their birth), **karma-ārya** (Ārya by virtue of their actions), **cāritra-ārya** (Ārya by virtue of their conduct), and **darśana-ārya** (Ārya by virtue of their vision). **Riddhi-prāpta Ārya** are of seven types, based on the difference in **buddhi** (intelligence), **vikriyā** (action), **tapa** (austerity), **bala** (strength), **auṣadha** (medicine), **rasa** (taste), and **akṣīṇa** (imperishable) **riddhi**. **Mleccha** are of two types: **antarvīpa-ja** (born in the **antarvīpa** (inner islands)) and **karma-bhūmi-ja** (born in the **karma-bhūmi** (land of karma)). There are eight **antarvīpa** in each of the eight directions within the **lavaṇa-udhadha** (salt ocean). And there are eight more **antarvīpa** in between them. There are eight **antarvīpa** at the ends of both the **himavan** (Himalayan) and **śikhari** (peak) mountains, and at the ends of both the **vijaya-ardha** (victorious half) mountains. Of these, the islands in the directions are located 500 **yojanas** (a unit of distance) away from the **vedikā** (a specific location). And the islands in between them are located 500 **yojanas** away from the **vidiś** (a specific location). There is no division of **śailākā** (a specific type of mountain). Except for those born in **upapada** on that side of this mountain and those who have attained **samudghāta**, no other **vidyadhara** (celestial beings) or **riddhi-prāpta muni** (saints who have attained **riddhi**) go there. Therefore, this name **Mānuṣottara** (above humans) is meaningful for this mountain. In this way, humans should be known in the **Jambūdvīpa** (a mythical island) and the two and a half other islands, and in the two oceans.

Page #292:
---------------------------
## Translation:

[172]
**Sarvarthasiddhi 288**
[3136 § 435

The islands within the six yojanas are called **Antardvipas**. The islands within the hundred yojanas are called **Vibhu**. The islands within the **Visvantar** are half the size of the **Vibhu**. The islands within the **Shailantas** are twenty-five yojanas in extent. 

In the east, there are people with one leg (**Ekoruka**). In the west, there are people with tails (**Langulin**). In the north, there are people who are mute (**Visyabhashaka**). In the south, there are people with horns (**Visanin**). In the four cardinal directions, there are people with ears like a rabbit (**Sashakarnasaskuli**), fish (**Saskuli**), a shield (**Pravarana**), and long ears (**Lambakarna**). In the eight intervals, there are people with faces like a horse (**Ashva**), lion (**Simha**), dog (**Kaka**), buffalo (**Mahisha**), boar (**Varaha**), tiger (**Vyagra**), crow (**Kaka**), and monkey (**Kapi**). In the two ends of the **Shikhari** mountain, there are people with faces like a cloud (**Megha**) and lightning (**Vidyun**). In the two ends of the **Himavat** mountain, there are people with faces like a fish (**Matsya**) and time (**Kala**). In the two ends of the **Uttara Vijayardha**, there are people with faces like an elephant (**Hasti**) and a mirror (**Adarsa**). In the two ends of the **Dakshina Vijayardha**, there are people with faces like a cow (**Go**), and a ram (**Mesha**).

The **Ekoruka** are earth-eaters and live in caves. The rest are flower and fruit eaters and live in trees. All of them have a lifespan of one **Palyopam**. These twenty-four **Antardvipas** are one yojana high above the surface of the water. Similarly, there are twenty-four **Antardvipas** in the **Kalod** ocean. These are all **Antardvipaj Mlechchas**. 

Apart from these, the **Shaka**, **Yavana**, **Shabara**, **Pulinda**, etc. are **Karmabhumij Mlechchas**.

**Special Note:** The **Shatkhandagama** classifies humans into two categories: **Karmabhumij** and **Akarmabhumij**. **Akarmabhumij** is another name for **Bhogabhumika**. One type of **Bhogabhumika** is **Kubhogabhumika**. The people born in **Kubhogabhumika** are called **Antardvipaj Mlechchas**. The rest, like the **Shaka**, **Yavana**, **Shabara**, **Pulinda**, etc. are **Karmabhumij Mlechchas**. Similarly, Aryans are also divided into two categories based on their region.

2. - णस्यां विषा दि.
1. उत्तरस्यामभाषका आ. दि. 1, दि. 2 1 1, दि. 2 । 3. वरणलम्ब मु. 4. काकधूककपि- मु. 5. मेघविद्यु- मु. 6. दक्षिणदिग्विज- मु. 7. -शतिद्वितीयपक्षेऽपि उभयोरतत्प्रष्टचत्वारिंशद्वीपा जलतला - दि. 28 त्सेधाः । तथा कालोवेऽपि आ. दि. 11

Page #293:
---------------------------
## Chapter Three

[3137 8 437] Chapter Three
[173 $ 436. What are the Karmabhoomis? Now, to explain this, it is said:
Bharata, Airavata, and Videha are the Karmabhoomis, excluding Devakuru and Uttarakuru. ||37|| 8437. Bharata, Airavata, and Videha, each five in number, are called Karmabhoomis. The inclusion of 'Videha' implies the inclusion of Devakuru and Uttarakuru, hence to negate that, it is said, "excluding Devakuru and Uttarakuru." The word 'excluding' signifies negation. Devakuru, Uttarakuru, Haimavat, Harivarsha, Ramyak, Hairanyavat, and Antarvipa are called Bhogabhoomis. Now, how do they become Karmabhoomis? Because they are the abode of auspicious and inauspicious Karmas. But, all three realms are the abode of Karma. Therefore, it is understood that these are the abode of Karma in a superior way. Now, the acquisition of inauspicious Karma, which leads to the seven Narakas, happens only in Bharata and other such realms. Similarly, the acquisition of auspicious Karma, which leads to the attainment of special places like Sarvarthasiddhi, also happens here. And, the initiation of six types of Karma, like agriculture, along with the giving of gifts, happens here, hence Bharata and other such realms should be known as Karmabhoomis. Other realms are primarily concerned with the enjoyment of the fruits of ten types of Kalpavriksha, hence they are called Bhogabhoomis.

There are two types of Aryas: Karmabhoomi Aryas and Akarmabhoomi Aryas. Those who live in the Bhogabhoomis are Akarmabhoomi Aryas, and those who live in the Karmabhoomis are Karmabhoomi Aryas. Akarmabhoomi Aryas and Mlechchas can attain up to four Gunasthanas, but Karmabhoomi Aryas and Mlechchas are also eligible for Anuvrata and Mahavrata. The detailed explanation of their Sayamasamyama and Samyama Gunasthanas is given in the Kshaya Prabhruta Labdhi Saar and Kshapana Saar.

8436. Now, to explain what the Karmabhoomis are, the next Sutra says:
Except for Devakuru and Uttarakuru, Bharata, Airavata, and Videha are all Karmabhoomis. ||37||

8437. Bharata, Airavata, and Videha, each five in number, are called Karmabhoomis. The inclusion of 'Videha' implies the inclusion of Devakuru and Uttarakuru, hence to negate that, the phrase "excluding Devakuru and Uttarakuru" is used. The word 'excluding' signifies negation. Devakuru, Uttarakuru, Haimavat, Harivarsha, Ramyak, Hairanyavat, and Antarvipa are called Bhogabhoomis.

**Question:** How do they become Karmabhoomis?

**Answer:** The abode of auspicious and inauspicious Karmas is called Karmabhoomi. Although all three realms are the abode of Karma, these are the abode of Karma in a superior way. The acquisition of inauspicious Karma, which leads to the seven Narakas, happens only in Bharata and other such realms. Similarly, the acquisition of auspicious Karma, which leads to the attainment of special places like Sarvarthasiddhi, also happens here. And, the initiation of six types of Karma, like agriculture, along with the giving of gifts, happens here, hence Bharata and other such realms should be known as Karmabhoomis. Other realms are primarily concerned with the enjoyment of the fruits of ten types of Kalpavriksha, hence they are called Bhogabhoomis.

**Note:** It has already been explained that the division of Bharata and other such realms is only in the two and a half Dvipas. In Jambudvipa, there is one each of Bharata and other such realms, and in Dhaatukokhand and Pushkarardha, there are two each. Thus, there are a total of 35 realms. Even though Uttarakuru and Devakuru are within the Videha realm, they are counted separately because they have a superior Bhogabhoomi system. Therefore, when we add the five Devakurus and five Uttarakurus to the five Videhas, the total number of realms becomes 45. Out of these, 5 are Bharata, 1. Bharataravatavidehaasch Mu., Ta., Na. 2. Harivansha: Ramya-A., Di. 1, Di. 21 3, Sarvo Lokatritaya: Karma-A., Di. 1, Di. 21 4. Ek Prak- Mu. 5, Shubhasya Sarva- Mu. 6 -Dhyaadishu Sthan- A., Di. 1, Di. 21 7. Panasya Punyakarma- Mu.

Page #294:
---------------------------
[174]
Sarvarthasiddho
8438. In the mentioned lands, for the purpose of explaining the state of human beings, the state of Ahanrsthiti is explained as being between the three Palya-upamas and the Antarmuhurta. ||38||.
$ 439 Three Palya-upamas are called Tripalyaopama. The Muhurta within is called Antarmuhurta. The connection is in order. The superior state of human beings is Tripalyaopama. The inferior state is Antarmuhurta. There are many variations in between. There are three types of Palya: Vyavaharapalya, Uddharapalya, and Adhhapalya. These are meaningful names. The first is called Vyavaharapalya, because it is the basis of the next two Palya. Nothing else can be measured by it. The second is Uddharapalya. From the hair removed from Uddharapalya, islands and oceans are counted. The third is Adhhapalya. Adha and Kalasthiti are synonymous. The measure of the first is now explained, because it is for the purpose of explaining it. For example, three Palya are considered skillful, which are as wide, long, and deep as a Yojana measured by the Angula. The hair of a ram born in a day and night, from one to seven days, is cut into pieces so that the second cut cannot be made with scissors. Then, in every hundred years, one hair is removed. The time taken for that pit to become empty is called Vyavaharapalyopama. Then, in every hundred years, one hair is removed from the countless crores of years. The time taken for that pit to become empty is called Uddharapalyopama. Ten crore crore of these Uddharapalya make one Uddharasagaropama. As many as 
1
5 Videha and 5 Airavata are 15 Karmabhumis and the remaining 30 are Bhogbhumis. The reason why these are called Karmabhumis and Bhogbhumis is explained in the original commentary.
8438. The next sutra explains the knowledge of the state in the mentioned lands: the superior state of human beings is three Palya-upamas and the inferior state is Antarmuhurta. ||38||
$ 439 'Tripalyaopama' is a Bahuvrihi compound of 'tri' and 'Palyaopama'. The time within the Muhurta is called Antarmuhurta. These two are connected with Para and Apara respectively. The superior state of human beings is three Palya-upamas and the inferior state is Antarmuhurta. The middle state is of many types. There are three types of Palya: Vyavaharapalya, Uddharapalya, and Adhhapalya. These are meaningful names. The first is called Vyavaharapalya, because it is the basis of the next two Palya. Nothing else can be measured by it. The second is Uddharapalya. From the hair removed from Uddharapalya, islands and oceans are counted. The third is Adhhapalya. Adha and Kalasthiti are synonymous. The measure of the first is now explained, because it is for the purpose of explaining it. For example, three Palya are considered skillful, which are as wide, long, and deep as a Yojana measured by the Angula. The hair of a ram born in a day and night, from one to seven days, is cut into pieces so that the second cut cannot be made with scissors. Then, in every hundred years, one hair is removed. The time taken for that pit to become empty is called Vyavaharapalyopama. Then, in every hundred years, one hair is removed from the countless crores of years. The time taken for that pit to become empty is called Uddharapalyopama. Ten crore crore of these Uddharapalya make one Uddharasagaropama. As many as 
1. Misu sthiti  Mu. 2. Drisyasyavyava   Mu. 3. Kathyaate. Tadyatha Mu.  4. Naapnu- Mu. 1 5. Ghaneebhutam Mu. 1 6 Tato varshasate ekaeka   Mu. 

[3138 § 438

Page #295:
---------------------------
The third chapter:

[175] There are as many islands and seas as there are hairs on a half-uddhara-pallya. A half-uddhara-pallya is filled with hairs that are cut off in a hundred years. Then, as each hair is removed from the half-uddhara-pallya, the time it takes for the space to become empty is called an adha-pallya-upam. Ten kodi-kodi adha-pallyas make one adha-sagara. Ten kodi-kodi adha-sagaras make one avasarpini. The utsarpini is also the same size.

With this adha-pallya, the karma-sthiti, bhava-sthiti, ayu-sthiti, and kaya-sthiti of naraki, tiryanch, deva, and manushya should be calculated. The sangraha-gatha also says:

"Vyavahar, uddhar, and adha, these three pallyas should be known. Vyavahar pallya is the cause of the number. The second is used to count the islands and seas. The third, adha-pallya, is used to account for the karma-sthiti."

8440. Just as there are these excellent and inferior states of humans, so too are there the same for tiryanch. [39]

8441. The yoni of tiryanch is called tiryanch-yoni. This means the birth obtained from the karma-udaya called tiryanch-gati. Those born in the tiryanch-yoni are called tiryanch-yonija. The excellent bhava-sthiti of these tiryanch-yonija is three pallya-upam, and the inferior bhava-sthiti is antarmuhurta. There are many variations in between.

Thus ends the third chapter of the Tattvarthavritti, known as Sarvarth Siddhi. [3]

Page #296:
---------------------------
## 176]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[31398441

The existence of *bhavas* (states of existence) is proven, because once having obtained a *bhavas* with a *jghanya* (inferior) lifespan, it is possible to move to another *paryaya* (state). The superior *kayasthiti* (physical state) of humans is *purvakotiprithaktva* (separation from the previous *koti*) of more than three *patyopama* (units of time). *Prithaktva* is a *raudhika* (conventional) term. Primarily, it means more than three and less than nine. Here, the word *prithaktva* has been used in a broader sense. The superior *kayasthiti* of *tiryanchas* (animals) is *anantakal* (infinite time), which is equal to countless *pudgala* (matter) transformations. This is called their *kayasthiti* in comparison to the general *tiryanchagati* (animal existence). If a being comes from another *gati* (state of existence) and continuously wanders in *tiryanchagati*, then it can remain in *tiryanchagati* for a maximum of this much time. After that, it is born in another *gati* according to the law. There are many types of *tiryanchas*, so their *kayasthiti* is different in relation to those types.

Thus, the third chapter of the *Tattvarthavritti* named *Sarvarthasiddhi* ends. ||3||

Page #297:
---------------------------
## Chapter Four

**8442.** The word "deva" (god) has been used many times in the sutras, such as "भवप्रत्ययो ऽवधिर्देवनारकाणाम्" (gods and hell-beings have knowledge of the limit of their bhavas). However, it is not clear who these devas are and how many types of devas there are. To clarify this, the next sutra states:

**Devas are of four nikayas (groups).** ||1||

**8443.** Devas are those who, due to the rise of the karma called "devagati" (god-hood) as an inner cause, enjoy various external glories and play freely in places like islands, oceans, etc. The use of the singular "deva" in the sutra is appropriate because the mention of the genus (jati) implies the mention of the species (bhuta). The use of the plural is to indicate the various types of devas. The implication is that there are many types of devas, even more than Indra and Samanika, and there are also many types in terms of their state, etc. Therefore, the plural is used to indicate them. Those who are gathered together by the power of the devagati karma, which is obtained through their own specific karmas, are called nikayas. The word "nikaya" means "group." The compound "caturnikaya" indicates that there are four main groups of devas. The question arises: what are the names of these four nikayas? The answer is: Bhavanavasi, Vyantar, Jyotishka, and Vaimanika.

**8444.** To determine the leshyas (degrees of purity) of these nikayas, the next sutra states:

**In the first three nikayas, there are four leshyas, up to the Pita leshya.** ||2||

1. iti va tanni- mu. 5. iti. Jaty- mu. Vishe- mu. Ta., na.

2. Vishesad dvipa- mu. 3. mudradisu prade- mu, 4.   danti te deva: mu.  6. 'Jatyasyayamekasminbahuvacanananyatarasyam' Pa. 1, 3, 2, 58
7. Svadharma

Page #298:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**178]** **Sarvarthasiddhi**

[413 8445 8445. 'Adit' is said, do not understand that the inclusion is at the end, in the middle, or otherwise. At the beginning, from the beginning. The term 'tri' is used to negate two and one. Why is it not used to negate four? Because of the word 'Adit'. Six Leshyas have been mentioned. To include four Leshyas, the term 'Pitaanta' is used. Pita means Tejas. Those who have Pita at the end are Pitaantas. Those who have Pitaanta Leshyas are Pitaantaleshyas. This means that in the three Nikayas of Bhavanvasi, Vyantara, and Jyotish, there are four Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, Kapota, and Pita for the Devas.

8446. To explain the internal variations of these Nikayas, it is said: Dashastapanchdwadashavikalpa, Kalpopapannaparyantah ||3||

8447. The four Deva Nikayas are to be understood as being related to the numbers ten, eight, five, and twelve respectively. Bhavanvasis are of ten types. Vyantaras are of eight types. Jyotishkas are of five types. Vaimanikas are of twelve types. Since all Vaimanikas are included in the twelve types, the qualifier 'Kalpopapannaparyantah' is used to negate Graiveyak etc. How is the term 'Kalpa' used? Indra etc. are ten types, which are considered in these.

8445. Do not understand that the inclusion is at the end, in the middle, or otherwise, for the three Nikayas at the end, the Nikayas in the middle. Therefore, the term 'Adit' is given in the Sutra. The term 'tri' is used to negate two and one Nikayas. The question is, why does the term 'tri' not negate four? The answer is, the term 'Adit' given in the Sutra indicates that the term 'tri' is not used to negate four. There are six Leshyas. To include four Leshyas, the term 'Pitaanta' is used in the Sutra. Here, Pita should be taken as Tejas Leshya. Here, first, there is a Bahuvrihi Samaas in the words Pita and Anta, and then in the words Pitaanta and Leshya. This means that in the three Nikayas of Bhavanvasi, Vyantara, and Jyotish, there are four Leshyas of Krishna, Neel, Kapota, and Pita for the Devas.

**Special Note:** Although there is only one Pita Leshya for Bhavanvasi, Vyantara, and Jyotish Devas, there is a rule that those who die with the middle portion of Krishna, Neel, and Kapota Leshyas are born as Mithyadrishti humans and Tiryanch in the Karmabhoomi, and those who die with the middle portion of Pita Leshya are born as Mithyadrishti humans and Tiryanch in the Bhogbhoomi in the Bhavan Trika. Since such humans and Tiryanch have the three inauspicious Leshyas at the beginning of their death, these three inauspicious Leshyas are also found in an insufficient state when they are born in the Bhavan Trika. This is why they are said to have four Leshyas, including Pita. The meaning is that in the Bhavan Trika, there are four Leshyas, including Pita, in an insufficient state, and one Pita Leshya in a sufficient state.

8446. Now, to show the internal differences of these Nikayas, the next Sutra says:

Those who are Kalpopapanna Deva, up to the four Nikayas of Devas, are of ten, eight, five, and twelve types respectively. ||3||

8447. There are four Deva Nikayas and four numbers, ten etc., so they should be understood in order. For example, Bhavanvasis are of ten types, Vyantaras are of eight types, Jyotishis are of five types, and Vaimanikas are of twelve types. From the previous statement, all Vaimanikas are included in the twelve types, so the term 'Kalpopapannaparyantah' is used in the Sutra to negate Graiveyak etc.

Page #299:
---------------------------
## Chapter Four

[414 $ 450] Chapter Four
[179 This is Kalyā. Even though the concept of Kalpa is possible for those who reside in the Bhavan, due to convention, the term Kalpa is used only for those who reside in the Vaimānika. Those who are born in Kalpas are called Kalpopanna. Those who have Kalpopanna Devas at the end of their existence are called Kalpopannaparyanta. $ 448. To further explain the distinctions, it is said:
Indra, Sāmānika, Trāstriśa, Pāriṣada, Ātmarakṣa, Lokapāla, Anīka, Prakīrṇaka, Ābhiyogy, and Kilviṣika, each one separately. ||4|| 8449. Those who are adorned with extraordinary qualities like Aṇimā, etc., which are not found in other Devas, are called Indra. Whatever is similar to the position, lifespan, strength, family, enjoyment, and consumption, etc., which are devoid of command and sovereignty, is called Sāmānika. Those who are in that similarity are called Sāmānika. They are great, like fathers, gurus, and teachers. Those who are like ministers and priests are called Trāstriśa. They are called Trāstriśa because they are Trāstriśa Devas. Those who are like friends and companions in the assembly are called Pāriṣada. Those who are like protectors are called Ātmarakṣa. Those who are like protectors of wealth are called Lokapāla. Those who protect the world are called Lokapāla. The seven types of Anīka, like infantry, etc., are those who are in charge of the army. Those who are like the people of towns and villages are called Prakīrṇaka. Those who are like servants, engaged in work like driving vehicles, etc., are called Ābhiyogy. Those who are like those who reside on the border are called Kilviṣika. Those who have a lot of Kilviṣa (sin) are called Kilviṣika.
$ 450. These ten categories, starting with Indra, are found in each of the four Nikāyas, one by one. 1.  Yatsamānāyu- Mu. 2. -Vṛttāḥ. Antyavāsi- Ā., Di. 1, Di. 2. 3. -Sthāniyāḥ. Kilviṣaṃ Mu. 4. -Yeṣām asti te Kilvi- Mu.

Page #300:
---------------------------
## 180] Sarvarthasiddhi

14158451.  Then, to explain the exceptions, the sutra says:
**"But the Vyantara and Jyotishka gods are devoid of the two distinctions of Trastrish and Lokapala."** ||5|| 8451.  In the Vyantara and Jyotishka, except for the two distinctions of Trastrish and Lokapala, the remaining eight distinctions should be understood. 8452. Now, to explain whether there is one Indra in each of these categories or some other rule, the next sutra says:
**"In the first two categories, there are two Indras."** ||6|| 8453.  The first two categories are the Bhavanavasi and Vyantara.  Doubt: How can the second category be called the first?  Solution:  The second category is called the first because it is close to the first.  The word "Dvi-Indra" implies the meaning of "two Indras".  For example, "Saptaparna" and "Ashtapaada".  Just as the words "Saptaparna" and "Ashtapaada" imply the meaning of "seven leaves" and "eight feet", respectively, so too should it be understood in the present context.  Explanation:  Among the Bhavanavasi, the two Indras of the Asura-Kumaras are Chamara and Vairochana.  The two Indras of the Naga-Kumaras are Dharana and Bhutananda.  The two Indras of the Vidyut-Kumaras are Harisingha and Harikanta.  The two Indras of the Suparna-Kumaras are Venudeva and Venudhari.  The two Indras of the Agni-Kumaras are Agnishikha and Agni-manava.  The two Indras of the Vata-Kumaras are Bailamba and Prabhanjana.  The two Indras of the Stanita-Kumaras are Sughoṣa and Mahaghosa.  The two Indras of the Udadhi-Kumaras are Jalakanta and Jalaprabha.  The two Indras of the Dvipa-Kumaras are Purna and Vasishtha.  The two Indras of the Dik-Kumaras are Amitagati and Amitavahana.  Similarly, among the Vyantara, the two Indras of the Kinnaras are Kinnara and Kimpurusha.  The two Indras of the Kimpurushas are Satpurusha and Mahapurusha.  The two Indras of the Mahoragas are Atikaya and Maha-kaya.  The two Indras of the Gandharvas are Giterati and Gotyasha.  The two Indras of the Yakshas are Purnabhadra and Manibhadra.  Therefore, to explain the exceptions, the next sutra says:
**"But the Vyantara and Jyotishka gods are devoid of the two distinctions of Trastrish and Lokapala."** ||5|| 
8551.  In the Vyantara and Jyotishka, except for the two distinctions of Trastrish and Lokapala, the remaining eight distinctions should be understood.
8452. Now, to explain whether there is one Indra in each of these categories or some other rule, the next sutra says:
**"In the first two categories, there are two Indras."** ||6||
6453.  The first two categories are the Bhavanavasi and Vyantara.  Doubt: How can the second category be called the first?  Solution:  The second category is called the first because it is close to the first.  The word "Dvi-Indra" implies the meaning of "two Indras".  For example, "Saptaparna" and "Ashtapaada".  Just as the words "Saptaparna" and "Ashtapaada" imply the meaning of "seven leaves" and "eight feet", respectively, so too should it be understood in the present context.  Explanation:  Among the Bhavanavasi, the two Indras of the Asura-Kumaras are Chamara and Vairochana.  The two Indras of the Naga-Kumaras are Dharana and Bhutananda.  The two Indras of the Vidyut-Kumaras are Harisingha and Harikanta.  The two Indras of the Suparna-Kumaras are Venudeva and Venudhari.  The two Indras of the Agni-Kumaras are Agnishikha and Agni-manava.  The two Indras of the Vata-Kumaras are Bailamba and Prabhanjana.  The two Indras of the Stanita-Kumaras are Sughoṣa and Mahaghosa.  The two Indras of the Udadhi-Kumaras are Jalakanta and Jalaprabha.  The two Indras of the Dvipa-Kumaras are Purna and Vasishtha.  The two Indras of the Dik-Kumaras are Amitagati and Amitavahana.  Similarly, among the Vyantara, the two Indras of the Kinnaras are Kinnara and Kimpurusha.  The two Indras of the Kimpurushas are Satpurusha and Mahapurusha.  The two Indras of the Mahoragas are Atikaya and Maha-kaya.  The two Indras of the Gandharvas are Giterati and Gotyasha.  The two Indras of the Yakshas are Purnabhadra and Manibhadra.

Page #301:
---------------------------
Fourth Chapter. The Terrible and the Most Terrible Rakshasas. The Resembling and the Non-resembling Bhutas. The Kala and the Mahakala Pishachas. 

7. The Aishana devas (devas up to the Aishana realm) are the Kayapravichara, i.e. they enjoy sensual pleasures through the body.

8. The remaining devas are the Sparsharupaśabdamanaḥpravichara, i.e. they enjoy pleasures of touch, form, sound and mind.

The Kalpavasis (devas dwelling in the Kalpa realms) are the ones remaining after the previously mentioned ones. Their enjoyment of touch, form, sound and mind is without conflict with the Arsha tradition.

Page #302:
---------------------------
182]
In the **Sarvarthasiddhi**,
[419 $458] They attain the highest bliss merely by seeing the beautiful forms, charming decorations, and graceful movements of the **Shṛngāra**-like **Aakāra** (forms). In the **Shukra**, **Mahāshukra**, **Shatāra**, and **Sahasrāra** heavens, the gods attain supreme joy merely by hearing the sweet music, gentle laughter, delightful conversations, and the soft sounds of ornaments of the divine women. In the **Ānata**, **Prāṇata**, **Āraṇa**, and **Achyuta** kalpas, the gods attain supreme happiness merely by thinking of their consorts. 8 458. Now, to determine the nature of the happiness of the remaining gods, the following sūtra is stated:
_ The others are devoid of worldly pleasures. _ ||9|| $ 459. The word "**pare**" (others) is used to include all the remaining gods. The word "**apravīcāra**" (devoid of worldly pleasures) is used to indicate the attainment of supreme bliss. **Pravīcāra** is the counteraction of pain. In the absence of this, they experience uninterrupted supreme bliss.
8460. The ten categories of the gods of the first **nikāya** have been mentioned. Now, to explain their general and specific designations, the following sūtra is stated:
The **bhavanavāsī** (heavenly dwellers) gods are of ten types: **asurakumāra**, **nāgakumāra**, **vidyutkumāra**, **suparṇakumāra**, **agnikumāra**, **vātakumāra**, **stanitakumāra**, **udadhikumāra**, **dvīpakumāra**, and **dikkuṁāra**. ||10||
8461. Those whose nature is to dwell in palaces are called **bhavanavāsī**. This is the general designation of the first **nikāya**. The **asura** etc. are specific designations, which are obtained due to the rise of specific **nāmakarma** (karmic actions related to names). Although all these gods have their own age and nature, their dress, ornaments, weapons, vehicles, mounts, and games are similar to those of human princes. Therefore, the word "**kumāra**" (prince) is commonly used for all **bhavanavāsī**. This word "**kumāra**" should be added to each of them. For example, **asurakumāra** etc. Question: Where are their palaces? Answer: The palaces of the **asurakumāra** are in the **pankabahula** (muddy) part of the **ratnaprabhā** (jewel-like) heaven. And in the **kharapṛthivī** (rough earth) part, one thousand **yojanas** (a unit of distance) above and below are excluded.

Page #303:
---------------------------
-4112 § 465]
The abodes of the Kumaras of the remaining Nāgas.
Chapter Four
6462. To determine the general and specific designations of the second Nikāya, it is said—
The Vyantaras are eight types: Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Mahoraga, Gandharva, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Bhūta, and Pishacha. 1110
8463. Those who reside in various distant lands are called 'Vyantaras', a general designation that applies to all eight types. These eight types of Vyantaras, from Kinnara onwards, are to be understood as arising from specific name-karma. The question arises: Where are their abodes? The answer is: Beyond this Jambudvipa, crossing countless islands and oceans, in the upper region of the Kharapṛthivī, are the abodes of seven types of Vyantaras. The Rakshasas reside in the region abundant with mud.
8464. To state the general and specific designations of the third Nikāya, it is said—
The Jyotishkas are five types: Surya, Chandra, Graha, Nakshatra, and Prakirṇaka stars. 112
8465. These five types are all luminous, hence the general designation 'Jyotishkas' is meaningful. Surya and the others are specific designations arising from specific name-karma. The separate mention of 'Surya and Chandra' is to indicate their prominence. The question arises: What is the reason for their prominence? The answer is: It is due to their influence and the like. The question arises: Where are their abodes? The answer is: From this same landmass, rising upwards for seven hundred and ninety yojanas, the stars wander, situated below all the Jyotishkas. From there, rising upwards for ten yojanas, the Surya wanders. From there, rising upwards for eighty yojanas, the Chandra revolves. Rising upwards for four yojanas are the Nakshatras. From there, rising upwards for four yojanas are the Budhas. From there, rising upwards for three yojanas are the Kumaras.

Page #304:
---------------------------
184] Sarvarthasiddhi
[41138466 yojanas above the earth are the stars. From there, four yojanas above are the constellations. From there, four yojanas above is Mercury. From there, three yojanas above is Venus. From there, three yojanas above is Jupiter. From there, three yojanas above is Mars. From there, three yojanas above is Saturn. This celestial sphere, filled with the celestial beings, is one hundred and ten yojanas thick and extends to the end of the ocean, encompassing countless islands and seas. It is said:
"From the surface of the earth, seven hundred and ninety yojanas above are the stars. Then, ten yojanas above is the sun. Then, eighty yojanas above is the moon. Then, four yojanas above are the constellations and four yojanas above is Mercury. Then, four times three yojanas above, that is, three yojanas above each, are Venus, Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn respectively."
8466. Now, to explain the specific movement of the celestial beings, the next sutra says:
The celestial beings circumambulate Mount Meru in the human realm and are constantly in motion. 13॥
8467. 'Meru-pradakshina' is a compound word in the sixth case. The word 'Meru-pradakshina' is used to explain the specific movement and to prevent any misunderstanding about a different movement. The word 'nitya-gatayah' is used to explain that they are constantly engaged in the action of movement. The word 'nri-loka' is used to indicate the realm of these celestial beings. The meaning is that the celestial beings constantly move in the two and a half islands and two seas, and not elsewhere.
Doubt: The cause of the movement of the celestial beings' vehicles is not found, so their movement cannot be established?
Solution: No, because this reason is not valid. The fact is that the celestial beings' vehicles are constantly moving due to the influence of the worthy beings who are engaged in movement. If it is said that why are the worthy beings constantly engaged in movement, then the answer is that this is the peculiarity of the result of karma. Their karma is being ripened through the form of movement. 1. Tatha chatvari yoja- ta.. na., tattva.। 2. Tatha chatvari yoja- ta., na., tattva.। 3. -sidi padutika dugachaukka. Tara- ta.. na, tattva.। 4. 'Nauduत्तरसत्तसए दस सीदी चदुद्गे तियबउक्के । तारिणससिरिक्खबुहा सुक्कगुरुंगारमंदगदी।'- ti., sa., ga. 332 ।


.

Page #305:
---------------------------
-4114 § 4697
Chapter Four
The luminous bodies revolve in a clockwise direction, having attained the eleven types of yogas. S 160 In order to understand the relationship between the motion of the luminous bodies and the time of activity, it is said - the time division made by them. ||14||
$ 469. The word 'tat' is used to refer to the luminous bodies that move. Time is not determined by motion alone, nor by luminous bodies alone; because of the non-perception of the former and the non-change of the latter. Time is of two types: practical and primary. The practical time division is the time, the time-interval, etc., made by them, which is defined by a particular action and is the cause of the definition of something else that is not defined. The primary is different, whose characteristics will be described later.
1185
is the result. This is the reason why they are constantly engaged in moving. Although the luminous deities revolve around Mount Meru, they still wander eleven hundred and twenty-one yojanas away from Mount Meru.
$ 468. Now, to give knowledge of the practical time in relation to the luminous bodies that move, the next sutra is said
The time division made by those moving luminous bodies is. ||14||
$ 469. The word 'tat' is used in the sutra to refer to the moving luminous deities. Time cannot be determined by motion alone, because it is not perceived, and time cannot be determined by luminous bodies alone without motion, because without change it will always remain the same. This is why the word 'tat' is used here to refer to the moving luminous bodies. Time is of two types: practical time and primary time. Of these, time and time-interval, etc., are the practical time divisions made by the moving luminous deities. This is known by a particular action and is the cause of knowing other things that are not known. Primary time is different, whose characteristics will be described later.
Special Note - Humans are found within the Manushottara mountain. The total extent from one side of the Manushottara mountain to the other is forty-five lakh yojanas. Humans are found in this area, therefore it is called the human world. In this world, the luminous bodies always revolve. Their revolution is around Meru. There is no luminous body sphere around Meru up to eleven hundred and twenty-one yojanas. Beyond this, it is scattered everywhere in the sky. There are two suns and two moons in Jambudvipa. One sun revolves around the entire Jambudvipa in two days and nights. Its four regions are considered to be 180 yojanas in Jambudvipa and 3300 yojanas in the salt ocean. The total number of lanes of the sun's revolution is 184. This area is divided into these lanes. A distance of two yojanas is considered between one lane and another. When the size of the sun's disc is added to this, it becomes 200 yojanas. This is the difference in sunrise. The difference in the sphere is only two yojanas. It takes a little more than two days and nights for the moon to complete its revolution. The difference in the moonrise comes from this. There are four suns, four moons in the salt ocean; twelve suns, twelve moons in the Dhatukikhanda; forty-two suns, forty-two moons in the Kalodadhi; and seventy-two suns, seventy-two moons in the Pushkarardha. Thus, there are one hundred and thirty-two suns and one hundred and thirty-two moons in the two and a half islands. Of these two, the moon, Indra and the sun are the Pratyindra. The family of each moon consists of one sun, twenty-eight constellations, eighty-eight planets and sixty-six thousand nine hundred kodi kodi stars. Although the movement of these luminous bodies is their nature, the eligible deities constantly carry the chariots of the sun, etc. These deities take the form of lions, elephants, bulls and horses. The lion-shaped deities...

Page #306:
---------------------------
## 136]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[4115 $ 4708 470. To explain the location of the Jyotishis, the next Sutra says:
**They are located outside.** ||15|| 6 471. The word 'bahiḥ' (outside) is used.  Question: Outside of what? Answer: Outside of the human realm (nṛloka). Question: How do we know this? Answer: The change in the case ending of the word 'nṛloka' in the previous Sutra indicates that the word 'bahiḥ' refers to the outside of the human realm. Question: But the previous Sutra stated that the Jyotishis are constantly moving within the human realm. Therefore, their location outside of it is already established. So, the statement 'bahiḥavastītāḥ' (they are located outside) is meaningless. Answer: That is not correct. Because the existence and location of the Jyotishis outside of the human realm is not established. Therefore, the statement 'bahiḥavastītāḥ' is used to establish both their existence and location. This Sutra is also used to negate the possibility of their movement in the opposite direction and their occasional movement. || 8 472. To introduce the general name of the fourth category, the next Sutra says:
**They are Vaimanikas.** ||16|| 8473. The word 'Vaimanika' is used to establish their authority. The beings who will be described next are Vaimanikas. This statement establishes their authority. Those who consider the beings residing within them as their own souls are called Vimana. And those who reside in those Vimana are called Vaimanikas. There are three types of Vimana: Indraka, Shreṇibaddha, and Pushpaprakirṇaka. Among them, the Indraka Vimana are located in the middle, like Indra. They are arranged in rows like the regions of the sky in the four directions. The faces of the elephant-like Devas are towards the south, the faces of the bull-like Devas are towards the west, and the faces of the horse-like Devas are towards the north. 
8470. Now, to explain the location of the twelve Jyotishis in the second half of the Dwīpa, the next Sutra says:
**The Jyotishi Devas reside outside the human realm.** ||15||
8471. The Sutra uses the word 'bahiḥ' (outside). Question: Outside of what? Answer: Outside of the human realm. Question: How do we know this? Answer: The word 'nṛloka' (human realm) appears in the previous Sutra. The change in the case ending of the word 'nṛloka' indicates that the word 'bahiḥ' refers to the outside of the human realm. Question: But the previous Sutra stated that the Jyotishis are constantly moving within the human realm. Therefore, their location outside of it is already established. So, the statement 'bahiḥavastītāḥ' (they are located outside) is meaningless. Answer: That is not correct. Because the existence and location of the Jyotishis outside of the human realm is not established. Therefore, the statement 'bahiḥavastītāḥ' is used to establish both their existence and location. This Sutra is also used to negate the possibility of their movement in the opposite direction and their occasional movement. 
6472. Now, to introduce the general name of the fourth category, the next Sutra says:
**The Devas of the fourth category are Vaimanikas.** ||16||
6473. The word 'Vaimanika' is used to establish their authority. The beings who will be described next are Vaimanikas. This statement establishes their authority. Those who consider the beings residing within them as their own souls are called Vimana. And those who reside in those Vimana are called Vaimanikas. There are three types of Vimana: Indraka, Shreṇibaddha, and Pushpaprakirṇaka. Among them, the Indraka Vimana are located in the middle, like Indra. They are arranged in rows like the regions of the sky in the four directions. The faces of the elephant-like Devas are towards the south, the faces of the bull-like Devas are towards the west, and the faces of the horse-like Devas are towards the north. 
8470. Now, to explain the location of the twelve Jyotishis in the second half of the Dwīpa, the next Sutra says:
**The Jyotishi Devas reside outside the human realm.** ||15||
8471. The Sutra uses the word 'bahiḥ' (outside). Question: Outside of what? Answer: Outside of the human realm. Question: How do we know this? Answer: The word 'nṛloka' (human realm) appears in the previous Sutra. The change in the case ending of the word 'nṛloka' indicates that the word 'bahiḥ' refers to the outside of the human realm. Question: But the previous Sutra stated that the Jyotishis are constantly moving within the human realm. Therefore, their location outside of it is already established. So, the statement 'bahiḥavastītāḥ' (they are located outside) is meaningless. Answer: That is not correct. Because the existence and location of the Jyotishis outside of the human realm is not established. Therefore, the statement 'bahiḥavastītāḥ' is used to establish both their existence and location. This Sutra is also used to negate the possibility of their movement in the opposite direction and their occasional movement. 
6472. Now, to introduce the general name of the fourth category, the next Sutra says:
**The Devas of the fourth category are Vaimanikas.** ||16||
6473. The word 'Vaimanika' is used to establish their authority. The beings who will be described next are Vaimanikas. This statement establishes their authority. Those who consider the beings residing within them as their own souls are called Vimana. And those who reside in those Vimana are called Vaimanikas. There are three types of Vimana: Indraka, Shreṇibaddha, and Pushpaprakirṇaka. Among them, the Indraka Vimana are located in the middle, like Indra. They are arranged in rows like the regions of the sky in the four directions. The faces of the elephant-like Devas are towards the south, the faces of the bull-like Devas are towards the west, and the faces of the horse-like Devas are towards the north. 
1. -nyatra bahiryo- Mu.। 2. -nāni vividhā- Mu.। 3. madhye vyava- Mu. ।
**Note:** The translation is based on the provided text

Page #307:
---------------------------
-4119 § 479]
The Vimanas. Those which are situated in the directions like scattered flowers are called Pushpaprakirnakas. 8474. To understand the difference of these Vaimanikas, the Sutra says: They are Kalpopapanna and Kalpatita. ||17||
8475. Those who are born in Kalpas are called Kalpopapanna. And those who are beyond Kalpas are called Kalpatita. Thus, there are two types of Vaimanikas.
§ 476. Now, to understand their specific location, the Sutra says: They reside above. ||18||
8477. Question: Why is this said? Answer: It is said to negate their oblique position. They do not reside obliquely like the Jyotishkas. Nor do they reside unevenly like the Vyantaras. They are said to be "above". Question: What are they? Answer: Kalpas.
8478. If so, in how many Kalpa Vimanas do those Devas reside? To answer this, the Sutra says: In the Saudharma, Aishana, Sanatkumara, Mahendra, Brahma, Brahmottara, Lantava, Kapishtha, Shukra, Mahashukra, Shatara, and Sahasrar, as well as in the Anata Pranata, Aran-Achyuta, nine Graiveyakas, and Vijay, Vaijayanta, Jayanta, Aparajita, and Sarvarthasiddhi. ||19||
8479. Question: How do these Saudharma, etc., words become names of Kalpas? Answer: In grammar, the suffix "an" has four meanings. By this, the words Saudharma, etc., become names of Kalpas, or they are called Kalpas by nature. Question: How are the words Saudharma, etc., names of Indra? Answer: By nature or by association. Question: How so? Answer: Saudharma is the name of a Sabha (assembly), and Indra resides in it. Therefore, it is called the Saudharma Kalpa. "Tadasminnasti" means "in that". "An" is the suffix.

Page #308:
---------------------------
## 188]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[41198419] The Indra of the Saudharma Kalpa is also known as Saudharma, due to his association with the Kalpa. The Indra's natural name is Ishana. The Kalpa where Ishana resides is called Aishana. The term "Aishana" is derived from the sutra "Tasyanivasah".  Therefore, the Indra associated with this Kalpa is also called Aishana. The Indra's natural name is Sanatkumara. The term "Sanatkumara" is derived from the sutra "Tasyanivasah".  Therefore, the Indra associated with this Kalpa is also called Sanatkumara. The Indra's natural name is Mahendra. The Kalpa where Mahendra resides is called Maheindra. Therefore, the Indra associated with this Kalpa is also called Maheindra. This pattern continues for the remaining Kalpas.

The relationship between the Kalpas is established by the term "Uparyupari" based on the Agamas. The Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas are the first two. Above them are the Sanatkumara and Maheindra Kalpas. Above them are the Brahmaloka and Brahmottara Kalpas. Above them are the Lantava and Kapishtha Kalpas. Above them are the Shukra and Mahashukra Kalpas. Above them are the Shatara and Sahasra Kalpas. Above them are the Anata and Pranata Kalpas. Above them are the Aran and Achyuta Kalpas.

Each Kalpa has its own Indra, both below and above. However, there is a single Indra for each pair of Kalpas in the middle. There are four Indras for the four Kalpas: Saudharma, Aishana, Sanatkumara, and Maheindra. There is one Indra named Brahma for the two Kalpas: Brahmaloka and Brahmottara. There is one Indra named Lantava for the two Kalpas: Lantava and Kapishtha. There is one Indra named Shukra for the two Kalpas: Shukra and Mahashukra. There is one Indra named Shatara for the two Kalpas: Shatara and Sahasra. There are four Indras for the four Kalpas: Anata, Pranata, Aran, and Achyuta.

Therefore, there are twelve Indras residing in the Kalpas. In Jambudvipa, there is a mountain called Mahamandara, which is one thousand yojanas deep and ninety thousand yojanas high. Below it is the Adholoka. The Tiryanloka is as wide and thick as the height of Mount Meru. Above it is the Urdhvaloka, whose Meru peak is forty yojanas wide. Above it, at a distance of a hair's breadth, is... 

1. "Tasyanivasah" - Pa. 4,2,69. "Tasyanivasadurbhavo" - Jainendra. 3, 2, 86.
2. Dvayamekam Mu.
3. Brahmandro mam Mu.
4. -gaho bhavati nava Mu., Ta., Na.
5. Bahulyaena Mu., Ta., Na., Di. 2.
6. Tatpramag (Merupraman) stirya- Mu.

Page #309:
---------------------------
[189
-4120 8482]
Chapter Four: Forty Yojanas of Shadow. In that, the Indraka, a non-moving aircraft, is situated in the space of a hair's breadth in the Uri. All else should be known from the Lokanuyoga. Why is the word 'nava' (nine) mentioned separately in 'navasu aveyakeshu'? This is to indicate that there are nine other aircraft called Anudisha. Therefore, the Anudishas should be understood.
6 480. To explain the differences between these authorized aircraft, the following sutra is stated:
"They are superior in terms of position, influence, happiness, radiance, purity of leshya, sense-object, and avadhi-object." ||20|| 8481. Position is the state of being with the body in that existence from the rise of the lifespan obtained by oneself. Influence is the power of curse and grace. Happiness is the experience of sense-objects. Radiance is the brilliance of the body, clothes, ornaments, etc. Leshya has been mentioned. Purity of leshya is called leshya-vishuddhi. The object of the senses and avadhi-knowledge is called indriya-vishaya and avadhi-vishaya. They are superior to these or in comparison to these. This means that the aircraft are superior in terms of position, etc., in each successive kalpa and prastara.
8482. Just as these aircraft are superior in terms of position, etc., in each successive kalpa, so too they are superior in terms of speed, etc. To negate this, the following sutra is stated:
1. -Vachanam anya- Ta., Na. 2. -Manani santiti Aa., Ta., Na. 3. Tanaam paraspa- Aa.: +.m sthanam Aa., Di. 1, Di. 2. 5. 'Apadane chahiyaruho:'- Pa. 5, 4, 45. Apadane'a. -Jainendra 4, 2, 62. 'Aadyadhibhya upasankaayanam' Pa. 5, 4, 44 Vaati. 'Aadyadhibhyastasi:' .. 4, 2, 601 6. Iti tasminnupa- Mu.

Page #310:
---------------------------
## 190] Sarvartha Siddhi

[4121] 8483. **Gati**, **Sharira**, **Parigraha**, and **Abhimana** are all inferior in the higher gods, one after the other. ||21|| 8483. **Gati** is the means of attaining a different place from one's current location. **Sharira** refers to the **Vaikriyika** body, as previously mentioned. **Parigraha** is the attachment to objects arising from the **Lobha** (greed) **Kashaya**. **Abhimana** is the ego arising from the **Mana** (pride) **Kashaya**. These **Gati** and other factors are inferior in the higher gods, one after the other. They have less desire for play and enjoyment in different places, hence their **Gati** is less. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Saudharm** and **Aishana** heavens is seven **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Sanatkumara** and **Maheindra** heavens is six **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Brahma**, **Brahmottara**, **Lantava**, and **Kapishtha** kalpas is five **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Shukra**, **MahaShukra**, **Shatara**, and **Sahasra** kalpas is four **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Anata** and **Pranata** kalpas is three and a half **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Arana** and **Achyuta** kalpas is three **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Adhograiveya** is two and a half **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Madhyagraiveya** is two **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the **Uparimagraiveya** and **Anudisha** is one and a half **Ratni** in size. The **Sharira** of the gods in the five **Anuttara** Vimanas is one **Ratni** in size. **Parigraha**, such as the size and shape of the Vimanas, is also inferior in the higher gods, one after the other. **Abhimana** is also inferior in the higher gods, one after the other, due to their lesser **Kashaya**.

8484. The **Leshya** of the gods in the first three **Nikayas** has been explained previously. Now, to explain the **Leshya** of the **Vaimanika** gods, the following sutra is given:

**Pita**, **Padma**, and **Shukla** **Leshya** are present in the gods of the two, three, and remaining **Kalpa** pairs, respectively. ||22||

8485. **Pita**, **Padma**, and **Shukla** are in **Dvandva** compound, and then **Leshya** is in **Bahuvrihi** compound.

Page #311:
---------------------------
## Chapter Four

[191]

They are those who have the **Pita**, **Padma** and **Shukla** **leshyas**. How is the shortness (of the words)? It is due to **auttarpadika** (rule). For example, in the **druta** (fast) **vrutti** (chanting), the **taparakarna** (pronunciation) is done, and in the **madhyama** (medium) and **vilambita** (slow) **vrutti**, its **upasanchyan** (pronunciation) is done. Or, **Pita**, **Padma** and **Shukla** are the meanings of the **varna** (color) of those who have **leshyas** similar to them. They are those who have **Pita**, **Padma** and **Shukla** **leshyas**. Which **leshya** belongs to whom? It is said here:

In the **Soudharma** and **Aishana** **kalpas** (epochs), there is **Pita** **leshya**. In the **Sanatkumar** and **Maheindra** **kalpas**, there are **Pita** and **Padma** **leshyas**. In the **Brahmaloka**, **Brahmottara**, **Lantava** and **Kapishtha** **kalpas**, there is **Padma** **leshya**. In the **Shukra**, **MahaShukra**, **Shatara** and **Sahasrar** **kalpas**, there are **Padma** and **Shukla** **leshyas**. In the **Anata** etc., there is **Shukla** **leshya**. In that too, in the **Anudisha** and **Anuttara** **vimanas** (planes), there is **ParamShukla** **leshya**.

**Doubt:** How is the **misra** (mixed) **leshya** taken, which is not mentioned in the **sutra** (rule)?

**Solution:** It is taken due to **sahacharya** (association), like in the world. For example, when it is said, "The **chhatri** (umbrella-holders) are going", the **achhatri** (non-umbrella-holders) also have the **chhatri** (umbrella) **vyavahar** (usage). Similarly, here also, one of the two **misra** **leshyas** is taken.

**Doubt:** How is this meaning understood from the **sutra**?

**Solution:** It should be related like this: In two **kalpa** **yugalas** (pairs of epochs), there is **Pita** **leshya**. Here, in the **Sanatkumar** and **Maheindra** **kalpas**, there is no **vivaksha** (intention) of **Padma** **leshya**. In the **Brahmaloka** etc. three **kalpa** **yugalas**, there is **Padma** **leshya**. In the **Shukra** and **MahaShukra**, there is no **vivaksha** of **Shukla** **leshya**. In the remaining **Shatara** etc., there is **Shukla** **leshya**. There is no **vivaksha** of **Padma** **leshya**. Therefore, there is no fault.

1. **Tarpadika** etc., **A.** (**Agama**), **Di.** (**Digambara**), 1, **Di.** 21
2. As said: **Du.** (**Dushkari**), **Mu.** (**Muni**), **Na.** (**Natyasutra**), **Ta.** (**Tattvartha**), 3, "In the **druta** **vrutti**, the **taparakarna** is done, and in the **madhyama** and **vilambita** **vrutti**, its **upasanchyan** is done due to **kalabheda** (difference in time). In the **druta** **vrutti**, the **taparakarna** is done, and in the **madhyama** and **vilambita** **vrutti**, its **upasanchyan** should be done. Similarly, in the **madhyama**, the **druta** and **vilambita** are done, and in the **vilambita**, the **druta** and **madhyama** are done. What is the reason? It is not accomplished. It is due to **kalabheda**. Because, the **varnas** (letters) which are three parts more in the **druta** **vrutti**, are in the **madhyama**. And the **varnas** which are three parts more in the **madhyama** **vrutti**, are in the **vilambita**." - **Pa.** (**Pravacana**), **Ma.** (**Mahatma**), **Ma.** (**Mahatma**), 1, 1, 9.
4. **Khyanam** (pronunciation) etc. **Druta**, **Madhyama**, **Vilambita** etc. Or, **A.** (**Agama**), **Di.** (**Digambara**), 1 - **Khyanam** (pronunciation) etc. **Druta**, **Madhyama**, **Vilambita** etc. Or, **Di.** (**Digambara**), 2.

Page #312:
---------------------------
## 192] Sarvartha Siddhi

[4123 84868486. It has been said that they are Kalpa-upapanna, but it is not known who these Kalpas are. Therefore, the next Sutra says:
Kalpas are those who are before the nine Graiveyakas. ||23|| 8487. It is not known from where the Kalpas begin, therefore the word Saudharma etc. is understood to be continued. From this, it is understood that Saudharma and the other nine Graiveyakas are Kalpas. By the principle of Pariseṣya, the rest are beyond Kalpas.
8488. Where are the Lokāntika Devas, who are Vaimānika? They are included in the Vaimānikas. How? The next Sutra says:
The abode of the Lokāntika Devas is Brahmaloka. ||24|| 8489. They come and merge into it, therefore it is called Ālaya or Āvāsa. Those whose abode is Brahmaloka are known as Lokāntika Devas who reside in Brahmaloka. If this is so, then all the Devas who reside in Brahmaloka would be Lokāntika. This is not a fault because of the acceptance of the meaningful term. The word Lokāntika is derived from the word Loka, which refers to Brahmaloka, and its end, or boundary, is called Lokānta. Those who reside there are called Lokāntika. Therefore, not all the Devas who reside in Brahmaloka are included. Their Vimānas are situated at the boundary of Brahmaloka. Or, the world, which is filled with birth, old age, and death, is called Samsāra, and its end is called Lokānta. Those who reside at the end of Samsāra are called Lokāntika. They are all Pariita-Samsārī, and after leaving there, they will attain Nirvāṇa after residing in a womb once more.
8490. To show the different types of these Lokāntika Devas, who have been described in general, the next Sutra says:
Sārasvata, Āditya, Vahni, Aruṇa, Gardatoya, Tuṣita, Avyābādha, and Aniṣṭa are the Lokāntika Devas. ||25||

Page #313:
---------------------------
## Chapter Four

**41268 493]**

**8491.** Where do the Sarvasvatas and others reside? It should be known that these Sarvasvatas and other groups of gods reside in the eight directions, starting from the east and going clockwise. For example, in the northeast corner are the Sarvasvata vimanas, in the east are the Aditya vimanas, in the southeast are the Agni vimanas, in the south are the Arun vimanas, in the southwest corner are the Gardatoya vimanas, in the west are the Tusita vimanas, in the northwest are the Avyabadha vimanas, and in the north are the Arishta vimanas. The word "cha" (and) in the sutra indicates that there are two more groups of gods between each of these. For example, between the Sarvasvatas and the Adityas are the Agnyabhas and Suryabhas. Between the Adityas and the Agnis are the Chandrabhas and Satyabhas. Between the Agnis and the Arunas are the Shreyaskaras and Kshemankaras. Between the Arunas and the Gardatoyas are the Vrishabheshtas and Kamacharas. Between the Gardatoyas and the Tusitas are the Nirmanarajas and Digantarakshitas. Between the Tusitas and the Avyabadhas are the Atmarakshitas and Sarvarakshitas. Between the Avyabadhas and the Arishta are the Maruts and Vasus. Between the Arishtas and the Sarvasvatas are the Ashvas and Vishvas. All these gods are independent, as they are not subject to any higher authority. They are Devarishis, free from worldly desires, and are worshipped by other gods. They are the fourteen previous Dharas, and are known to be dedicated to the liberation and enlightenment of the Tirthankaras.

**8492.** It has been said that the Laukantika gods, after being liberated from their worldly existence, attain nirvana after being born in a womb. Is there a similar difference in the time of attaining nirvana for other gods? To answer this, the next sutra says:

**26. In the Vijayavimanas, there are two types of gods.**

**8493.** The word "adi" (and so on) here refers to the types. This means that the Vijay, Vaijayanta, Jayanta, Aparajita, and the nine Anudigas are included. What is the type here? The type here is the birth of Samyagdrstis while being an Indra. If you say that this leads to the fulfillment of all desires, then it is not so, because they are not the highest. The meaning of the word "charma" (extreme) is established by the fact that they are the ultimate. The ultimate state is...

Page #314:
---------------------------
## 194]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[4127 § 494
With respect to the human existence of the body. There are two ultimate bodies, those who have them are called Dvicharama. Those who fall from victory etc. and do not abandon right faith, are born as humans, perform austerities, attain victory etc. again, and then fall from there, again attain human birth and become Siddhas. This is called Dvicharama-dehatva.
494. It is said that the path of the lower births is auspicious for the living being in its worldly states. Again, in the context of the state, the sutra says "and those born in lower births". There, it is not known who are the lower births. To this, the commentary says, "Except for humans, the rest are lower births." ||27||
$ 495. The commentary has already mentioned the gods and hell beings. Humans have also been mentioned earlier in the context of "humans who were previously humans". Other than these, the remaining beings who are in the cycle of birth and death are to be understood as lower births. Should their separate realms be described, just like the realms of gods etc.? Since they are present in all realms, their separate realms are not mentioned.
8 496. It is said that the state of hell beings, humans, and lower births has been mentioned. The state of gods has not been mentioned. To mention that, first, to explain the state of those who reside in the abodes mentioned earlier, the following sutra is said. 
1. The rest are lower births, Mu., Di. 2 1

Page #315:
---------------------------
-4130 $ 501] Chapter Four
[193 The Asuras, Nagas, Suparnas, Dvipas, and the rest have a status comparable to one Sagaropama, three Palyopama, two and a half Palyopama, two Palyopama, and one and a half Palyopama respectively. ||28||
8497. The relationship of the Asuras, etc., with the Sagaropama, etc., should be understood in order. This is the excellent status. The inferior status will be mentioned later. Thus, the Asuras have a status comparable to one Sagaropama. The Nagas have a status comparable to three Palyopama. The Suparnas have a status comparable to two and a half Palyopama. The Dvipas have a status comparable to two Palyopama. And the rest of the six have a status comparable to one and a half Palyopama.
$ 498. After mentioning the status of the first group of Devas, the status of the Vyantara and Jyotishis is due in order. But, bypassing them, the status of the Vaimanikas is mentioned. Why? Because the status of the Vyantara and Jyotishis will be mentioned briefly later. To state the status of the two Kalpas mentioned in the beginning, the following Sutra is said:
The Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas have a status slightly greater than two Sagaropama. ||29|| $ 499. The dual form 'Sagaropame' indicates two. 'Adhike' is the word of authority. Where does this authority extend to? Up to the Sahasrar Kalpa. How is this known? It is known from the word 'tu' in the next Sutra. Thus, it is to be understood that the Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas have a status slightly greater than two Sagaropama. $500. To understand the specific status of the next two Kalpas, the following Sutra is said:
The Sanatkumara and Maheindra Kalpas have a status slightly greater than seven Sagaropama. ||30|| 8501. In these two Kalpas, the Devas have a slightly greater status of seven Sagaropama.
The Asura Kumaras, Naga Kumaras, Suparna Kumaras, Dvipa Kumaras, and the rest of the residents of the Bhavanas have a status comparable to one Sagaropama, three Palyopama, two and a half Palyopama, two Palyopama, and one and a half Palyopama respectively. ||28||
8.497. Here, the relationship of the Asura Kumaras, etc., with the Sagaropama, etc., should be understood in order. This is the excellent status. The inferior status will be mentioned later. Thus, the Asuras have a status comparable to one Sagaropama. The Naga Kumaras have a status comparable to three Palyopama. The Suparnas have a status comparable to two and a half Palyopama. The Dvipas have a status comparable to two Palyopama. And the rest of the six Kumaras have a status comparable to one and a half Palyopama.
8498. After mentioning the status of the first group of Devas, the status of the Vyantara and Jyotishis is due in order. But, bypassing them, the status of the Vaimanikas is mentioned; because the status of the Vyantara and Jyotishis will be mentioned briefly later. To state the status of the two Kalpas mentioned in the beginning, the following Sutra is said: _ The Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas have a status slightly greater than two Sagaropama. ||29||
8499. The Sutra uses the dual form 'Sagaropame', which indicates two Sagaropama. 'Adhike' is the word of authority. Question- Where does this authority extend to? Answer- Up to the Sahasrar Kalpa. Question- How is this known? Answer- It is known from the word 'tu' in the next Sutra. Thus, it is certain that the Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas have a status slightly greater than two Sagaropama.
00. Now, to understand the specific status of the next two Kalpas, the following Sutra is said:
The Sanatkumara and Maheindra Kalpas have a status slightly greater than seven Sagaropama. ||30||
8501. In these two Kalpas, the Devas have a slightly greater status of seven Sagaropama. 1.-pama status: Mu.

Page #316:
---------------------------
## 196]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[4131 $ 5028502. To explain the specific state of being in the Brahma-loka and other realms, up to Achyuta, the following sutra is stated:
**Trisaptanavaikadashatrayodashapanchadashabhiradhikani tu ||31||**
8503. The term 'sapta' (seven) is taken from the previous sutra. Its connection with the numbers three, etc., mentioned here should be understood. For example, seven plus three, seven plus seven, etc. The connection between each pair should be understood. The word 'tu' indicates a specific meaning. What does it specify? The word 'adhika' (more) is understood to be connected with the four numbers (three, etc.) and not with the last two. Therefore, the meaning is as follows: In the Brahma-loka and Brahma-uttar, the state of being is ten sagaropama more. In the Lantava and Kapishtha, the state of being is fourteen sagaropama more. In the Shukra and Maha-shukra, the state of being is sixteen sagaropama more. In the Shatara and Sahasrar, the state of being is eighteen sagaropama more. In the Anata and Pranata, the state of being is twenty sagaropama more. In the Aran and Achyuta, the state of being is twenty-two sagaropama more.

8504. To explain the specific state of being in the realms above Aran-Achyuta, the following sutra is stated:
**Praranachutavardhvamakeanavasuveyakeshuvijayadishu sarvarthasiddhau cha ||32||**
$ 505. The term 'adhika' (more) is understood from the previous sutra. Therefore, the connection should be understood as follows: One more in each.

8502. Now, to explain the specific state of being in the kalpas from Brahma-loka up to Achyuta, the following sutra is stated:
From the pair Brahma-Brahmottara up to the pair Aran-Achyuta, in each pair, the state of being is seven sagaropama more than three, seven sagaropama more than seven, seven sagaropama more than nine, seven sagaropama more than eleven, seven sagaropama more than thirteen, and seven sagaropama more than fifteen. ||31||

8503. Here, the term 'sapta' (seven) is taken from the previous sutra. Its connection with the numbers three, etc., mentioned here should be understood. For example, three more than seven, seven more than seven, etc. And, the connection between each pair should be understood in sequence. The word 'tu' in the sutra is used to indicate a specific meaning. Question: What specific meaning does it convey? Answer: It conveys the specific meaning that the word 'adhika' (more) is understood to be connected with the four numbers (three, etc.) and not with the last two states of being. Therefore, the meaning here is as follows: In Brahma-loka and Brahma-uttar, the state of being is ten sagaropama more. In Lantava and Kapishtha, the state of being is fourteen sagaropama more. In Shukra and Maha-shukra, the state of being is sixteen sagaropama more. In Shatara and Sahasrar, the state of being is eighteen sagaropama more. In Anata and Pranata, the state of being is twenty sagaropama more. And, in Aran and Achyuta, the state of being is twenty-two sagaropama more.

8504. Now, to explain the specific state of being in the realms above Aran-Achyuta, the following sutra is stated:
Above Aran-Achyuta, in each of the nine praveyakas, in each of the nine anudishas, and in each of the four vijayadikas, the state of being is one sagaropama more. And, in Sarvarthasiddhi, the state of being is thirty-three sagaropama. ||32||

8505. The term 'adhika' (more) is understood from the previous sutra, therefore, the connection here should be understood as follows: One more in each.

Page #317:
---------------------------
## Chapter Four

[197]

**Why is the term "nine" used?** It is used to indicate that each [heavenly abode] has one more [Sagaropama] than the previous one. Otherwise, there would only be one more Sagaropama in the Graiveyakas. The word "Adi" in "Vijayādi" is a general term, so it includes the Anudishas. The separate mention of "Sarvarthasiddhi" is to indicate that it does not have a lower [Sagaropama] level. Therefore, the meaning is: In the Adhograiveyakas, the first has twenty-three Sagaropama, the second has twenty-four, and the third has twenty-five. In the Madhyamagraiveyakas, the first has twenty-six, the second has twenty-seven, and the third has twenty-eight. In the Uparimagraiveyakas, the first has twenty-nine, the second has thirty, and the third has thirty-one. In the Anudish Vimanas, there are thirty-two Sagaropama. In the Vijayādi, there are thirty-three Sagaropama, which is the highest level, even in Sarvarthasiddhi.

**§ 506.** To indicate the lower level in the heavenly abodes with the highest level, the following Sutra is stated:

"The lower level is one Palyopama more than the previous one." [33]

**§ 507.** The Palyopama has been explained. The lower level is one Palyopama more. Whose is this? It is for the Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas. How is this understood? It will be stated later that "the higher level of the previous ones is the lower level of the next ones."

**§ 508.** To indicate the lower level of the heavenly abodes above the Saudharma and Aishana Kalpas, the following Sutra is stated:

"The higher level of the previous ones is the lower level of the next ones." [34]

1. Jajanysthiti: Mu.
2. Javanysthiti: Mu.

Page #318:
---------------------------
##  [198]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[4135 § 509
$ 509. 'Paratah' here means 'in the next place'. The word 'dvitva' is used in the sense of 'repetition'. Similarly, the word 'purva' is also used in the sense of 'repetition'. The word 'adhika' is understood here. Therefore, the connection should be made in this way: In the Saudharma and Aishana kalpas, the superior state, which is two sagaropama, becomes the inferior state in the Sanatkumara and Maheendra kalpas when one time is added to it. In the Sanatkumara and Maheendra kalpas, the superior state, which is seven sagaropama, becomes the inferior state in the Brahma and Brahmottara kalpas when one time is added to it, and so on.
8510. The superior state of the narakas has been mentioned. Although the inferior state is not mentioned in the sutra, the Acharya wants to explain it briefly. Therefore, he says in the next sutra:
The superior state of the narakas in the second and subsequent realms is the inferior state in the next and subsequent realms. ||35||
8511. Question: Why is the word 'cha' used in the sutra? Answer: The word 'cha' is used to summarize the subject matter. Question: What is the subject matter? Answer: The subject matter is 'paratah paratah purva purva anantara aparaa sthitih'. Therefore, the word 'cha' summarizes this. This means that the superior state of the narakas in the Ratnaprabha, which is one sagaropama, is the inferior state in the Sharkaraprabha. The superior state in the Sharkaraprabha, which is three sagaropama, is the inferior state in the Valukaprabha, and so on.
8512. Thus, the inferior state in the second and subsequent narakas has been mentioned. Now, to explain the inferior state in the first naraka, the Acharya says in the next sutra:
In the first realm, the inferior state is ten thousand years. ||36||
§ 513. The word 'aparaa sthitih' is understood here. This means that in the Ratnaprabha earth, the inferior state is ten thousand years.
1. Taani Brahma- Mu. Ta. | 2. Rtate. Ath Bhavan- Aa. Fa. 1, Fa. 2 1

Page #319:
---------------------------
[199
 4140 $522]
Chapter Four: 8514. Now, to explain the lowest state of those who dwell in mansions, the following aphorism is stated:
In those who dwell in mansions. ||37||
$ 515. Why is the word 'cha' used in the aphorism? Answer: To connect the subject matter. This implies that the lowest state of those who dwell in mansions is ten thousand years.
8516. Now, to explain the lowest state of the Vyantaras, the following aphorism is stated:
Of the Vyantaras also. ||38||
8517. The word 'cha' in the aphorism is used to connect the subject matter. This implies that the lowest state of the Vyantaras is ten thousand years.
8 518. Now, to explain the highest state of the Arhas, the following aphorism is stated:
The highest state is one Palvopama more. ||39||
$ 519. The word 'para' means the highest. This implies that the highest state of the Vyantaras is one Palvopama more.
8 520. Now, the state of the Jyotishkas should be explained, therefore the following aphorism is stated:
The highest state of the Jyotishkas also. ||40||
8521. The word 'cha' in the aphorism is used to connect the subject matter. This implies that the highest state of the Jyotishkas is one Palvopama more.
522. Now, to explain the lowest state of the Jyotishkas, the following aphorism is stated:

Page #320:
---------------------------
## 200] Sarvartha Siddhi
[4141 8523 Tadastabhagopara ||4|| 8 523. Tasyapalyopamasyaastabhagho jyotishkaanamapara sthitiritiarthah.
8524. Ath lokantkaanam visheshoktaanaam sthitivishesho moktaha. Sa kiyanityanocyate
Laukantkaanam astau sagaropamariN sarvesham ||42|| 8525. Avishistah sarve te shuklaleshyaah panchahastotsedhashareerah.
Iti tattvarthavrittau sarvarthasiddhi sanjnikaayaam chaturtho'dhyayah ||4||

The inferior position of the Jyotishis is the eighth part of the superior position. ||41||
6 523. The meaning of this sutra is that the eighth part of the Palyopama, that is, the inferior position of the Jyotishis.
8554. The specific position of the Laukantika Devas has not been mentioned. Now, it is being told how much it is. The position of all Laukantikas is eight Sagaropamas. ||42||
8525. All these Laukantikas have a white Leshya and their body height is five hands.
Thus, the fourth chapter of the Tattvarthavritti named Sarvarthasiddhi ends. 140
1. Shareerah. Chatunikayadevaanaam sthanaam bhedah sukhaadikam. Paraapara sthitirleshya turyaadhyaaye nirupitam || Iti tatva - mu., di. 1, mi. 2, aa. ||

Page #321:
---------------------------
Chapter Five 8526. Now, the substance of the Jiva, among the objects of Samyagdarshana, has been explained. Now, the substance of the Ajiva has been considered, and in order to explain its names and distinctions, this sutra is spoken.
Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, and Pudgala are the Ajiva-kaya. ||1|| 8527. The word 'kaya' is derived from the body. Here, it is applied by way of analogy. What is the reason for this analogy? Just as the body is made up of the accumulation of Pudgala substance, so also Dharma, etc., are called 'kaya' because they are like bodies in terms of the accumulation of their regions. Ajiva and kaya are in a karmadharaya compound, which is formed according to the sutra 'visheshanam visheshyena'. Objection: In the case of 'neelotpala', etc., there is a difference between the qualifier and the qualified, and therefore, the relationship between the qualifier and the qualified is established. But in the case of Ajiva-kaya, what is the reason for establishing the relationship between the qualifier and the qualified? Solution: In the case of Ajiva-kaya, there is also a difference, because the word 'Ajiva' also exists in time, which is not a kaya, and the word 'kaya' also exists in the Jiva. Why is the word 'kaya' used? It is used to indicate the multiplicity of regions. Dharma, etc., have many regions. Objection: It has already been stated that 'there are countless regions of Dharma, Adharma, and the Jiva'. This itself indicates the multiplicity of regions. Solution: That is true. But with this statement, it is understood that the regions of Dharma, etc., are countless, not countable, and not infinite. The word 'kaya' is used in this sutra to indicate that the substance of time does not have an accumulation of regions. Time will be explained later. To negate the regions of time, 1. Jainendra. 113148. 2. Satyam asmin ta, na. 3. Kalapradesha- A., Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #322:
---------------------------
202]
[512 § 528
The term 'kāya' is used. Just as an atom, being only a point, does not have any other points, and is therefore called 'apradesha' (without parts), similarly, a time atom, being only one point, is also 'apradesha'. The term 'ajīva' is a general term for dharma, etc., because they do not possess the characteristics of a jīva. The terms 'dharma', 'adharma', 'ākāsha', and 'pudgala' are specific terms, which are compound.
8528. Here it is said, "In all the transformations of substances, only..." etc. It is asked, what are the substances mentioned in these sutras?
The answer is:
Dharma, adharma, ākāsha, and pudgala are the substances. ||2||
8529. The word 'dravya' is derived from the root 'du', which means 'to obtain'. Therefore, the meaning of the word 'dravya' is that which is obtained by its own transformations, or which obtains transformations.
Doubt: Is 'dravya' a category, and is it called 'dravya' because of its relation to this category?
Answer: No, because this would not prove both. Just as a stick and a stick-holder are both separately established, and therefore their relation is established, similarly, 'dravya' and 'dravya-tva' are not separately established. If, even though they are not separately established, their relation is accepted, then the relation of a sky-flower and the second head of a natural man would also have to be accepted. If you accept their separate establishment, then the separate acceptance of 'dravya-tva' is useless.
Doubt: If you say that 'dravya' is a collection of qualities, then also, in the absence of a difference between qualities and their collection, the term 'dravya' would not be appropriate. If you accept a difference, then the same fault arises as mentioned earlier.
Doubt: If you say that 'dravya' is that which is obtained by qualities, or which obtains qualities, then also the same fault arises?
Answer: No, because, in some cases there is a difference, and in some cases there is no difference, and therefore the term 'dravya' is established. Qualities and 'dravya' cannot exist without each other. 1. This is not its fault. 2. Dharma, adharma, ākāsha, and pudgala are the substances. 3. The second head of a natural man. 4. A collection of qualities is 'dravya'. 5. The term 'dravya' is established. 6. It obtains. 7. It is obtained.

Page #323:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five: The Establishment of the Designation of Substance through the Proof of Difference and Non-Difference

**Difference** is established due to the non-perception of non-difference through the difference of designation, characteristics, purpose, etc. **Non-difference** is established due to the non-perception of difference. 

**The substances** like Dharma, etc., are many, hence the plural designation "dravyaani" is used to indicate their co-location.

**Objection:** Just as the number is repeated, the masculine gender should also be repeated.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because words with inherent gender never deviate from their gender. Therefore, Dharma, etc., are substances.

**8530.** Due to the immediate succession, only four are designated as substances. Therefore, this sutra is said to include the others.

**Jivas are also substances. (3)**

**8531.** The word "jiva" has been explained. The plural designation is used to indicate the different types of jiva substances. The word "cha" is used to connect the jiva substances to the previous substances, implying that jivas are also substances. Thus, these five, along with the time to be mentioned later, become six substances.

**Objection:** The definition of substance will be given later as "dravyaṁ guṇaparyayavat" (substance is that which has qualities and modifications). Therefore, Dharma, etc., become substances due to the characteristics of the definition, so why is there a need for their separate enumeration?

**Solution:** The enumeration is for the purpose of determination. This eliminates the substances like earth, etc., that are assumed by other schools of thought.

**Objection:** How?

**Solution:** Earth, water, fire, air, and mind are included in the pudgala substance, because they have form, taste, smell, and touch.

**Objection:** Air and mind do not have form, etc.

**Solution:** No, because air has form, etc., like a pot, due to its tangibility.

**Objection:** Air is not perceived by the eye, etc., therefore it does not have form, etc.

**Solution:** No, because in the category of atoms, etc.,

Page #324:
---------------------------
## 204]
**Sapicity**

[5138531] There would be an **atiprasanga** (fallacy of excessive implication) if we were to say that atoms are not perceived by the senses like eyes, etc., and therefore they lack form, etc. Similarly, water is fragrant because it is tangible, like earth. Fire also has taste and smell because it has form, like earth. Mind is of two types: **dravya-mana** (material mind) and **bhava-mana** (mental mind). Of these, **bhava-mana** is the essence of knowledge, and knowledge is a quality of the soul, therefore it is included within the soul. **Dravya-mana** has form, etc., and is therefore a modification of **pudgala** (matter). Just as mind has form, etc., it is also an instrument for the use of knowledge, like the eye sense. 

**Objection:**  Since even sound, which is intangible, is seen to be an instrument for the use of knowledge, the argument used to prove that mind has form, etc., is **vyabhichari** (fallacious). 

**Solution:** No, because sound is **paudgalika** (material), therefore it has the potential to be tangible.

**Objection:** Just as atoms are proven to have form, etc., because their effects have form, etc., the effects of air and mind do not have form, etc.

**Solution:** No, because the effects of air and mind also have form, etc., because it is accepted that all atoms have the potential to produce all effects that have form, etc. There are no atoms that are specifically of the earth, etc., types, because we see the beginning of all things through the mixing of types. 

Similarly, direction is included within space, because there is a basis for the usage of terms like "here" and "there" in relation to the regions of space, based on the rising of the sun, etc.

**Special Note:** In relation to types, all substances like souls, **pudgala**, etc., are called **dravya** (substance). The word **dravya** has two meanings: **dravna-shila** (capable of flowing) and **dhruva** (permanent). Every substance in the universe is both capable of transformation and permanent, therefore it is called **dravya**. The meaning is that every substance never violates its own qualities and modifications. It has a fixed flow, based on which it continues to flow. The word **dravya** is used in the Jain philosophy, and especially in the Vaisheshika philosophy. In the Vaisheshika philosophy, a complete distinction is made between **guna** (quality) and **gunin** (possessor of quality), **kriya** (action) and **kriyavan** (possessor of action), and **samanya** (general) and **vishesha** (particular). Therefore, it is **dravya** in relation to **dravya-tva** (substance-ness). The word **dravya** has this meaning, but it does not seem appropriate, because there is no independent substance called **dravya-tva** that is experienced. This philosophy considers earth, water, fire, air, 1. **iti cet para**   **Mu., A., Di. 1, Di. 2**. 2. **-yoga-karanatva** **Mu**. 3. **karyatva-darsha-** **Mu**. 4. **drishya te m tesha** **A., Di. 1, Di. 21**. 5. **tad-utpatti:** **Mu**.

Page #325:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

**532.** To explain the specific characteristics of the substances mentioned, the following sutra is stated:
The substances are eternal, permanent, and formless. ||4||

**533.** The word "eternal" means permanent. According to the *Vārtika* "ne dhve tyah", the word "nitya" is formed by adding the suffix "ty" to the root "ni" in the sense of permanent. These six substances, which are characterized by specific features like motion, cause, etc. in relation to *paryāyāthika* (relating to the categories of existence), and by general features like existence, etc. in relation to *dravyaāthika* (relating to the categories of substance), never undergo destruction, hence they are eternal. This will be further explained in the sutra "tad bhāva avyayam nityam". Their number never changes, hence they are permanent. The six substances, Dharma, etc., never exceed the number six, hence they are called permanent. They do not possess form, hence they are formless. Here, only the absence of form is stated, but since taste, etc. are its associates, their absence is also implied. Therefore, formless means non-material.

**534.** Just as the general characteristics of being eternal and permanent are applicable to all substances, the characteristic of being formless is also applicable to *pudgala*. Therefore, to explain the exception, the following sutra is stated:
*Pudgala* are formed. ||5||

Page #326:
---------------------------
[206]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[516 § 535
8535.  "Rupa" and "Murti" have the same meaning. Question: What is "Murti"? Answer: "Murti" is the result of the transformation of form and other aspects. Those who have form are called "Rupi". This means "Murtiman". Alternatively, "Rupa" is a word that signifies a specific quality. Those who have it are called "Rupi". Question: Why is "Rasa" etc. not included here? Answer: Because "Rasa" etc. are inseparable from form, they are included within it.
The plural form "Pudgalah" is used to indicate the difference. Pudgalas are different due to the difference in Skandha and Paramanu. These differences in Pudgalas will be discussed later. If Pudgalas are considered to be one and formless, like the Pradhan, it would contradict the existence of the world as a manifestation.
8536. Question: Are all the substances like Dharma etc. also different, like Pudgalas? The next Sutra answers this:
From Akasha to each substance is one. ||6||
8537. "A" in this Sutra signifies affirmation. This is said following the sequential order of the Sutras. This includes Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha. The word "Ek" signifies number. It qualifies the substance. This means that Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha are each one substance. Question: If this is so, then why is the plural form "Ekadravyaani" used in the Sutra? Answer: The plural form is used in relation to Dharma etc. substances. Question: "Ek" has the power to signify many, so why not just use "Ekak" instead of "Ekadravyaani"? This would make the Sutra shorter. Also, the use of the word "Dravya" is pointless? Answer: The word "Dravya" is used in the Sutra to indicate that these Dharma etc. substances are one in relation to Dravya. This means that if only "Ekak" was used in the Sutra, it would not be clear whether these Dharma etc. substances are one in relation to Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, or Bhava. Therefore, "Ekadravyaani" is used to remove this doubt. Among these, Dharma and Adharma have countless possibilities in relation to Kshetra, and infinite possibilities in relation to Bhava. 
/
1. Word: । Tesa A., Di. 1, Di. 2 1 2. ' Ishadarthe Kriyayoge Maryadabhividhau Cha Yah. Etamaatam Ngitam Vidyad Vakyasmarayorngit. 3. Purvimaanusrutyae- Mu. 4. -vati. Ek- A. Di. 1, Di- 2 1 5. Arthakam. Tatkriyate Drishya- Ta Na. । -Arthakam. Tajjnayate Duvya- A. Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #327:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five:
[207
**Taking Hold of the Subtle**

This [sutra] shows that the multitude of jivas and pudgalas is not due to their being innumerable and infinite in relation to the absence of a field, but rather due to the desirability of infinite and innumerable variations.

8538. This is said for the purpose of understanding the specific characteristics of the individual substances that have been authorized. They are inactive. ||7||

8539. The modification that arises from both internal and external causes is called action, which is the cause of a substance's attainment of a different field. Those that are devoid of such action are inactive. Here it is argued: If dharma, etc., are inactive substances, then their production would not occur. For the production of pots, etc., is seen to be preceded by action. And without production, there would be no destruction. Therefore, the concept of all substances having production, etc., as their three characteristics is contradicted? No, because there is another explanation. Even in the absence of production caused by action, the production of dharma, etc., is conceived of in another way. For example, there are two types of production: self-caused and caused by another's modification. Self-caused production is accepted on the basis of the authority of the scriptures, which state that there are infinite subtle and gross qualities in every substance, which, due to their being located in the six places, are constantly undergoing increase and decrease. Therefore, their production and destruction are natural. Similarly, there is also production and destruction caused by another's modification. For example, dharma, etc., are the causes of the movement, rest, and immersion of horses, etc. Since there is a difference in these movements, etc., from moment to moment, their causes must also be different. Thus, production and destruction are attributed to dharma, etc., in relation to another's modification.

It is argued: If dharma, etc., are inactive, then they cannot be the cause of the movement, etc., of jivas and pudgalas. For water, etc., are active, and they are seen to be the cause of the movement, etc., of fish, etc., otherwise not? This is not a fault.

Page #328:
---------------------------
208] Sarvarthasiddhi
[5188540] Because of being a mere instrument, like the eye. Just as the eye is a mere instrument in the perception of form, so also it is not the case that a distracted mind can perceive form even in the presence of the eye. When the inactivity of the substances of dharma, adharma, and space is accepted, the activity of jiva and pudgala is obtained from the meaning. But if it is said that time is also active? No; because it has no authority here. Therefore, it is not authorized along with these.
$ 540. In the phrase "ajivakaya", the word "kaya" indicates only the existence of regions, not the number of regions determined by them. Therefore, to determine that, the next sutra is said:
There are innumerable regions of dharma, adharma, and one jiva. ||8||
8541. Those that are beyond number are called innumerable. Innumerable is of three types - jghanya, utkrisht, and ajghanyotkrisht. Here, the ajghanyotkrisht innumerable is taken. "Pradisyante iti pradesah" is the etymology of the word "pradesh". The meaning is that what gives a sign of the developed mana is called a pradesh. The characteristics of the paramanu will be explained later. The region in which it resides is called a pradesh. The number of regions of dharma, adharma, and one jiva is equal. Of these, dharma and adharma substances are inactive and spread throughout the lokakasha. Although the regions of jiva are equal to the dharma and adharma substances, it is still capable of contraction and expansion, so it resides in the extent of the body, small or large, obtained due to karma. And at the time of the kevalisamudghata, when it pervades the entire loka, the eight middle regions of jiva are situated in the middle of the vajra-like plate of the chitra earth, below the Meru mountain, and the remaining regions pervade the entire loka, above, below, and diagonally. This is not a fault, because like the eye sense, these are mere instruments in the force. Just as the eye sense is a mere instrument in the perception of form, so also it is not the case that a distracted mind can perceive form even in the presence of the eye. In the same way, it should be understood in the present context. Thus, when the inactivity of the substances of dharma, adharma, and space is accepted, the activity of jiva and pudgala is obtained from the meaning. Doubt - Will the substance of time also be active?
No - No; because it has no authority here. Therefore, it is not authorized along with these substances.
5540. In the phrase "ajivakaya", the word "kaya" indicates only the existence of regions, not the number of regions determined by them. Therefore, to determine that, the next sutra is said:
There are innumerable regions of dharma, adharma, and one jiva. ||8||
8541. Those that are beyond number are called innumerable. Innumerable is of three types - jghanya, utkrisht, and ajghanyotkrisht. Here, the ajghanyotkrisht innumerable is taken. "Pradisyante iti pradesah" is the etymology of the word "pradesh". The meaning is that what gives a sign of the developed mana is called a pradesh. The characteristics of the paramanu will be explained later. The region in which it resides is called a pradesh. The number of regions of dharma, adharma, and one jiva is equal. Of these, dharma and adharma substances are inactive and spread throughout the lokakasha. Although the regions of jiva are equal to the dharma and adharma substances, it is still capable of contraction and expansion, so it resides in the extent of the body, small or large, obtained due to karma. And at the time of the kevalisamudghata, when it pervades the entire loka, the eight middle regions of jiva are situated in the middle of the vajra-like plate of the chitra earth, below the Meru mountain, and the remaining regions pervade the entire loka, above, below, and diagonally.
1. -Even the instrument is not Mu., Ta., Na.

Page #329:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

**8542.** Now, to explain how many regions there are in the space substance, the following sutra states:
**There are infinite regions in space.** ||9||

**8543.** Those which have no end are called infinite. What are they? Regions. Of what? Of space. As before, the concept of regions should be understood.

**8544.** The regions of the non-material substances have been explained. Now, the regions of the material pudgalas need to be understood. Therefore, the following sutra states:
**Pudgalas have countable, uncountable, and infinite regions.** ||10||

**8545.** The word "and" implies that there are infinite regions. For some pudgala substances, like a dyad, there are countable regions, while for others, there are uncountable and infinite regions. 
**Question:** Should we consider the concept of "infinitely infinite" here?
**Answer:** No, because here we are considering the general concept of infinity. There are three types of infinity: parita-ananta (limited infinity), yukta-ananta (combined infinity), and ananta-ananta (infinitely infinite). All of these are encompassed by the general concept of infinity.
**Question:** If the universe has uncountable regions, then it would be the substratum for both the infinite-region and infinitely infinite-region skandhas, leading to a contradiction. Therefore, pudgalas cannot have infinite regions.
**Answer:** This is not a valid objection, because due to the ability to undergo subtle transformations and the power of penetration, the pudgala skandhas with infinite or infinitely infinite regions can exist within space. Subtle, transformed, infinitely infinite atoms reside within each region of space. Their power of penetration is unimpeded. Therefore, the existence of infinitely infinite atoms within a single region does not lead to a contradiction.

Page #330:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

[210] In Sarvārthasiddhi:
[5111] Due to the use of the general term 'pudgalānām' in the previous sūtra, there arises the implication that even the atoms (aṇus) have spatial parts. To refute this, the following sūtra is stated:

Atoms (aṇus) do not have spatial parts. ॥1॥ [6547] The remaining part of the sentence is 'spatial parts do not exist'. Why do they not exist? Because atoms are of the nature of a single spatial part. Just as in the case of the single space-point (ākāśa-pradeśa), there is no division of spatial parts, similarly, due to the atoms being of the nature of a single spatial part, there is no division of spatial parts. Moreover, there is no other substance smaller than the atom, so that its spatial parts could be designated.

[8548] To establish the substratum (ādhāra) of the aforementioned attributes (dharmādi) that are devoid of spatial parts, the following sūtra is stated:

The incorporation (avagāha) of the dharmādi substances is in the loka-ākāśa (cosmic space). ॥12॥ [8549] The meaning is that the incorporation of the mentioned dharmādi substances is not outside the loka-ākāśa. If the dharmādi substances have the loka-ākāśa as their substratum, then what is the substratum of the ākāśa? The ākāśa has no other substratum; it is self-established (sva-pratiṣṭha). If the ākāśa is self-established, then the dharmādi substances are also self-established. If another substratum is imagined for the dharmādi substances, then another substratum would also have to be imagined for the ākāśa. This would lead to an infinite regress. But this is not a defect, because there is no substance with a greater dimension than the ākāśa in which the ākāśa could be said to be situated. The ākāśa is infinite in all directions. However, the ākāśa is spoken of as the substratum (ādhāraṇa) of the dharmādi substances due to the perspective of the vyavahāra-naya (empirical viewpoint). From the standpoint of the evam-bhūta-naya (the perspective of the true nature), all substances are self-established. As it is said, "Where do you reside? Within the self." The conclusion is that the dharmādi substances are not outside the loka-ākāśa, and this is the fruit of the conception of the substratum-substrate (ādhārādheyakalpanā) established here.

Page #331:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

[21i] Just as the seeds of the *badari* tree are seen in a well, so too is the *lokaakasha* not seen in the same way as the *dharma* and other substances that are born later. Therefore, even from the perspective of practical reasoning, the concept of a base and a dependent does not hold true, does it? This is not a fault, because even in things that exist simultaneously, the relationship of base and dependent is seen. For example, form and other qualities are in a pot, and hands and other limbs are in the body. Now, the nature of *loka* is explained. 

**Question:** What is *loka*?

**Answer:** Where *dharma* and other substances are located, that is called *loka*. The word *loka* is derived from the root *lok* with the suffix *ghan* in the sense of location.

*Aakasha* is of two types: *lokaakasha* and *alokaakasha*. *Loka* has already been explained. The *aakasha* where *loka* is found is called *lokaakasha*. Beyond that, in all directions, is the infinite *alokaakasha*.

The division between *loka* and *aloka* is to be understood in terms of the existence and non-existence of the *dharmaastikaya* and *adharmaastikaya*. If the *dharmaastikaya* does not exist, then there would be no basis for the rules governing the movement of *jiva* and *pudgala*, and therefore no division between *loka* and *aloka*. Similarly, if the *adharmaastikaya* does not exist, then there would be no basis for the existence of *jiva* and *pudgala*, leading to their non-existence and consequently, no division between *loka* and *aloka*. Therefore, the existence and non-existence of both the *dharmaastikaya* and *adharmaastikaya* establish the division between *loka* and *aloka*.

8550. Since there can be a difference in the location of the substances that are mentioned in *lokaakasha*, the next *sutra* is stated to explain the specific location of each substance:

"The *dharma* and *adharma* substances are completely immersed in *lokaakasha*." [13]

8551. The word "completely" in the *sutra* is used to show that the *dharma* and *adharma* substances are present throughout the entire *lokaakasha*. Just as a pot is located in a house, the *dharma* and *adharma* substances are not located in *lokaakasha* in the same way. Rather, they are present in *lokaakasha* like oil in sesame seeds. This means that they are present in every part of *lokaakasha*.

**Doubt:** The relationship of base and dependent is seen only in those things that are born before and after in *loka*. For example, the well is the base for the *badari* seeds. Similarly, if *aakasha* is born before and the *dharma* and other substances are born later, then this is not the case. Therefore, even from the perspective of practical reasoning, the concept of a base and a dependent does not hold true, does it?

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because even in things that exist simultaneously, the relationship of base and dependent is seen. For example, form and other qualities are in a pot, and hands and other limbs are in the body.

Page #332:
---------------------------
## 212] Sarvarthasiddhi

[51148552 - The absence of obstruction is to be known due to the power of penetration.
$ 552. Therefore, to explain the special penetration of the pudgalas, which are material, non-spatial, countable, uncountable, and infinite in number, the following sutra is stated:
The penetration of pudgalas is to be considered as being in one space, etc. ||14|| 8 553. One space is one space. Those whose beginning is one space are called one space, etc. In them, the penetration of pudgalas is to be considered as optional. "The whole is the sum of its parts"3, therefore, even one space is considered. For example, the penetration of an atom in one space of the sky. Two atoms, bound or unbound, in one space or in two spaces. Three atoms, bound or unbound, in one, two, or three spaces. In this way, the penetration of the skandhas, which are countable, uncountable, and infinite in number, in one, countable, and uncountable spaces of the loka-akasha, is to be understood. Now, it is reasonable that the non-material dharma and adharma can exist in one place without obstruction. But how can the material pudgalas exist in one place without obstruction? The answer is that due to their penetrative nature and subtle transformation, the material pudgalas do not obstruct each other in their penetration, just as the light of many lamps can exist in one lampshade. This is also to be understood from the authority of the scriptures. It is said:
"The loka is filled on all sides with subtle and gross, infinite and innumerable, diverse pudgalakayas." 1. Matamekaprade- Mu. 2. Eka ev pradesah Mu. 3. Pa. Ma. Bha. 2, 2, 2, 24. 4. Panam ekatra Mu., Ta. 5. Panchatyi. Ga. 64.

8552. Now, to explain the special penetration of the pudgalas, which are opposite to the aforementioned substances and which are non-spatial or countable, uncountable, and infinite in number, the following sutra is stated:
The penetration of pudgalas is optional in one space, etc. 140
8553. One and space are both parts of a compound word. Those whose beginning is one space are called one space, etc. In them, the penetration of pudgalas is optional. Here, the compound word is analyzed into its parts, but the meaning of the compound is taken as a whole, therefore, even one space is considered. The explanation is as follows: The penetration of one atom in one space of the sky. Two atoms, bound or unbound, in one space or in two spaces. Three atoms, bound or unbound, in one, two, or three spaces. In this way, the penetration of the skandhas, which are countable, uncountable, and infinite in number, in one, countable, and uncountable spaces of the loka-akasha, is to be understood. The question arises: It is reasonable that the non-material dharma and adharma can exist in one place without obstruction. But how can the material pudgalas exist in one place without obstruction? The answer is that due to their penetrative nature and subtle transformation, the material pudgalas do not obstruct each other in their penetration, just as the light of many lamps can exist in one lampshade. This is also to be understood from the authority of the scriptures. It is said:
"The loka is filled on all sides with subtle and gross, infinite and innumerable, diverse pudgalakayas." 1. Matamekaprade- Mu. 2. Eka ev pradesah Mu. 3. Pa. Ma. Bha. 2, 2, 2, 24. 4. Panam ekatra Mu., Ta. 5. Panchatyi. Ga. 64.

8552. Now, to explain the special penetration of the pudgalas, which are opposite to the aforementioned substances and which are non-spatial or countable, uncountable, and infinite in number, the following sutra is stated:
The penetration of pudgalas is optional in one space, etc. 140
8553. One and space are both parts of a compound word. Those whose beginning is one space are called one space, etc. In them, the penetration of pudgalas is optional. Here, the compound word is analyzed into its parts, but the meaning of the compound is taken as a whole, therefore, even one space is considered. The explanation is as follows: The penetration of one atom in one space of the sky. Two atoms, bound or unbound, in one space or in two spaces. Three atoms, bound or unbound, in one, two, or three spaces. In this way, the penetration of the skandhas, which are countable, uncountable, and infinite in number, in one, countable, and uncountable spaces of the loka-akasha, is to be understood. The question arises: It is reasonable that the non-material dharma and adharma can exist in one place without obstruction. But how can the material pudgalas exist in one place without obstruction? The answer is that due to their penetrative nature and subtle transformation, the material pudgalas do not obstruct each other in their penetration, just as the light of many lamps can exist in one lampshade. This is also to be understood from the authority of the scriptures. It is said:
"The loka is filled on all sides with subtle and gross, infinite and innumerable, diverse pudgalakayas." 1. Matamekaprade- Mu. 2. Eka ev pradesah Mu. 3. Pa. Ma. Bha. 2, 2, 2, 24. 4. Panam ekatra Mu., Ta. 5. Panchatyi. Ga. 64.

Page #333:
---------------------------
-51168557 Chapter Five
[213 8554. Now, how the avagāha of jīvas is, that is explained.
The avagāha of jīvas is in the countless parts, etc., of the loka-ākāśa. ||15|| 8555. 'Loka-ākāśe' is understood here. One part of that which is divided into countless parts is called a countless part. That is the beginning of those which are countless parts, etc. In them, the avagāha of jīvas is to be known. For example, one jīva resides in one countless part. In this way, the avagāha of one jīva is to be known from two, three, four, etc., countless parts up to the entire loka. But the avagāha of many jīvas is in the entire loka. If one jīva resides in one countless part, how can an infinite number of jīvas with bodies reside in the loka-ākāśa according to the measure of dravya? The answer is that their residence is to be understood due to the difference between subtle and gross. The gross jīvas have bodies with resistance. The subtle jīvas, although they have bodies, are subtle, and therefore, even in the space that one nigoda jīva avagāhas, an infinite number of jīvas with ordinary bodies reside. They do not collide with each other or with the gross jīvas, so there is no conflict in the avagāha of an infinite number of jīvas in the loka-ākāśa.
556. Here, it is said that the space of one jīva is equal to the loka-ākāśa. How can it reside in the countless parts, etc., of the loka? It should be that it pervades the entire loka. To this, it is said:
Like a lamp, due to the contraction and expansion of the space of jīvas. ||16|| 8557. Because the soul is of an immaterial nature, due to its eternal bondage, it somehow takes on a material form. 1. Even though it has a body, A., Di. 1, Di. 2. 2. -Even though it avagāhas, Mu.

Page #334:
---------------------------
[214] Sarvarthasiddhi
[5117 $ 558] Due to the influence of karma, the body resides in the gross and subtle forms. Due to the influence of karma, the nature of contraction and expansion of space is present. Therefore, it is reasonable that the soul resides in countless parts of the universe, like a lamp. Just as a lamp, even though its light is not limited by space, is limited by a cover, a shell, or other coverings, so too, the soul is limited by karma. 

**Question:**  Since dharma and other substances interpenetrate each other, wouldn't they become one?

**Answer:** No, even though they are in close contact with each other, they do not lose their individual nature. As it is said:

"All substances interpenetrate each other, giving space to each other, and always remaining together, yet they do not abandon their own nature." 8558

**Since it is said that dharma and other substances have different natures, the next sutra states:**

"Motion and rest are the functions of dharma and adharma respectively." 17. 8559

**Explanation:** Motion is the cause of reaching another place. Rest is the opposite of motion. "Upgraha" means "function" and is derived from the root "upgrihyate." "Gati-sthiti" is a compound word meaning "motion and rest." Motion and rest are the functions, hence the sutra states "Gati-sthiti-upgraha." "Dharma-adharmayo" is in the sixth case, indicating the agent. "Upkara" means "function" and is derived from the root "upkriyate."

**Question:** What is this function?

**Answer:** The function of motion and the function of rest are the functions.

**Question:** If this is the case, then the dual number is implied.

**Answer:** This is not a fault, because a word that is used in a general sense, even though it is connected to another word, does not lose its original number. For example, "Saadhoh karyaam tapahshruthe." 

**Therefore, it is said that:**

The dharma-kaya is the common support for the souls and pudgalas that are undergoing the results of motion, like fish in water. Similarly, the dharma-kaya is the common support for the souls and pudgalas that are undergoing the results of rest.

Page #335:
---------------------------
[5117 § 559]
[215
The earth element is the common substratum for the stationary state of living beings and pudgalas, just as the earth is the substratum for the stationary state of horses, etc.
**Objection:** The term "substratum" is redundant, as "benefit" would suffice. For example, "motion and rest are the benefits of dharma and adharma."
**Solution:** This is not a flaw; the term "substratum" is used to clarify the order. Just as there is an order between dharma and adharma, motion and rest, so too is there an order in the way living beings and pudgalas receive the benefit of dharma. The benefit of dharma is the motion of living beings, and the benefit of adharma is the stationary state of pudgalas. The term "substratum" is used to clarify this order.
**Objection:** The benefit of dharma and adharma is attributed to space, as it is omnipresent.
**Solution:** This is incorrect, as space has other benefits. The purpose of space is to permeate all substances, including dharma, etc. If one substance is attributed with multiple purposes, then there would be no distinction between the world and the non-world.
**Objection:** The benefits of dharma and adharma can be attributed to earth, water, etc., as they are capable of performing these functions. Therefore, it is not appropriate to attribute them to dharma and adharma.
**Solution:** No, because it has been specifically stated that dharma and adharma are the common causes of motion and rest. Moreover, one action can be caused by multiple factors.
**Objection:** Dharma and adharma are equally powerful, so they should restrict each other's motion and rest.
**Solution:** No, because they are not motivating factors.
**Objection:** Dharma and adharma do not exist, as they are not perceivable, like the horns of a donkey.
**Solution:** No, because all proponents agree on this. The point is that all proponents accept both perceivable and non-perceivable objects. Therefore, their non-existence cannot be asserted. Secondly, the argument of "non-perceivability" is invalid against us Jains, because we have the eye of omniscience, which is the direct knowledge of the attributes of things.
1.
Chapter Five
The phrase "karma is penance" has "karma" in the singular and "penance" in the dual. This should be understood in the context of the present discussion. The meaning of this sutra is that just as water is the common cause for the motion of fish, so too are dharma and adharma the common causes for the motion of living beings and pudgalas. Similarly, just as the earth is the common cause for the stationary state of horses, etc., so too are adharma and adharma the common causes for the stationary state of living beings and pudgalas.
**Objection:** The term "substratum" is redundant in the sutra, as "benefit" would suffice. For example, "motion and rest are the benefits of dharma and adharma."
**Solution:** This is not a flaw; the term "substratum" is used to clarify the order. Just as there is an order between dharma and adharma, motion and rest, so too is there an order in the way living beings and pudgalas receive the benefit of dharma. The benefit of dharma is the motion of living beings, and the benefit of adharma is the stationary state of pudgalas. The term "substratum" is used to clarify this order.
**Objection:** The benefit of dharma and adharma is attributed to space, as it is omnipresent.
**Solution:** This is incorrect, as space has other benefits. The purpose of space is to permeate all substances, including dharma, etc. If one substance is attributed with multiple purposes, then there would be no distinction between the world and the non-world.
**Objection:** The benefits of dharma and adharma can be attributed to earth, water, etc., as they are capable of performing these functions. Therefore, it is not appropriate to attribute them to dharma and adharma.
**Solution:** No, because it has been specifically stated that dharma and adharma are the common causes of motion and rest. Moreover, one action can be caused by multiple factors.
**Objection:** Dharma and adharma are equally powerful, so they should restrict each other's motion and rest.
**Solution:** No, because they are not motivating factors.
**Objection:** Dharma and adharma do not exist, as they are not perceivable, like the horns of a donkey.
**Solution:** No, because all proponents agree on this. The point is that all proponents accept both perceivable and non-perceivable objects. Therefore, their non-existence cannot be asserted. Secondly, the argument of "non-perceivability" is invalid against us Jains, because we have the eye of omniscience, which is the direct knowledge of the attributes of things.
1.  It is indeed proven.
2.  It is refuted.
3.  It is refuted by the proponents.

Page #336:
---------------------------
[216] Sarvarthasiddhi
[51188560] All things are perceived by the omniscient God with the eye of perfect direct knowledge. They are also known by those who have scriptural knowledge through His teachings.
8560. Here it is said, if the existence of the non-sensory dharma and adharma substances is accepted due to their relationship with benefit, then what is the benefit of the non-sensory space, which is mentioned next?
Space provides room for movement. ||18||
8561. The word 'benefit' is repeated. The benefit of space is to be understood as providing room for the movement of living beings and pudgalas. It is said, it is appropriate to provide room for the movement of living beings and pudgalas, who are active. But how can dharma and other substances, which are inactive and eternally connected, be considered as providing room for movement? No, this is established by convention. Just as space is said to be all-pervasive even though it does not move, because it is present everywhere, similarly, even though there is no action of providing room for movement in dharma and adharma substances, they are present everywhere in the space of the universe, therefore they are considered as providing room for movement. It is said, if providing room for movement is the nature of space, then why is there a collision of vajra, loha, etc. with bhitti, etc. and of cows, etc. with walls, etc.? But collision is seen. Therefore, it is clear that providing room for movement is not the nature of space. This is not a fault, because vajra and loha, etc. are gross substances, therefore they collide with each other, hence the ability of space to provide room for movement is not lost. The collision that is seen here is only of the substances that provide room for movement. The meaning is that vajra, etc. are gross substances, therefore they do not provide room for movement to each other, this is not a fault of space. However, the pudgalas, which are subtle, provide room for movement to each other. It is said, if this is so, then this is not a unique characteristic of space, because it is also present in other substances. No, because all substances...

Page #337:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

[217]

There is no fault in saying that this is an extraordinary characteristic for the purpose of general understanding, because it is found in other substances as well. 

**Objection:** But in the absence of light and space, there is no absence of that (i.e., space). 

**Solution:** No, because it does not abandon its own nature.

8562. The benefit of space has been stated. Now, it is said what is the benefit of the pudgalas mentioned thereafter:

**"Body, speech, mind, and pranapana are the benefits of pudgalas."** ||19||

8563. **Objection:** This is inappropriate. 

**Counter-objection:** What is inappropriate? 

**Objection:** The question was what is the benefit of pudgalas, but in the answer, it is said that "body, etc., are made of pudgalas," thus stating the characteristics of pudgalas. 

**Solution:** This is not inappropriate, because the characteristics of pudgalas will be stated later. This sutra is only meant to state the benefit of pudgalas towards jivas, hence it is stated in the context of benefit. 

The five bodies have already been mentioned. They are subtle and not perceptible to the senses. But the upayaya bodies that are obtained due to their arising, some are perceptible to the senses and some are beyond the senses. The karmas that are the cause of these five bodies are also grasped by the grasping of the body. 

It is said that all these bodies are pudgalic, and thus pudgalas benefit jivas. 

**Objection:** Like space, karmic bodies do not have any form, therefore it is not appropriate to consider them pudgalic. Yes, it is appropriate to consider the five bodies, which have form, as pudgalic. 

**Solution:** This is not correct, because karmic bodies are also pudgalic, because their result is due to their connection with material objects. It is clearly seen that rice, etc., which are cooked due to their connection with water, etc., are pudgalic. Similarly, karmic bodies also become cooked when they come in contact with material objects like sugar, thorns, etc., therefore they are pudgalic.

Page #338:
---------------------------
[218] **Sarvarthasiddhi**
[51198 563] It is to be understood that speech is of two types: **dravya-vacana** (material speech) and **bhava-vacana** (mental speech). 

**Bhava-vacana** is **paudgalika** (composed of pudgalas) because it is caused by the destruction and pacification of **virya-antaraya** (obstacles to energy), **mati-jnana-avaran** (veil of knowledge), and **sruta-jnana-avaran** (veil of scriptural knowledge) karmas, as well as the **anga-upanga** (limbs and sub-limbs) karmas. In the absence of pudgalas, **bhava-vacana** would not exist.

**Dravya-vacana** is also **paudgalika** because pudgalas, driven by the soul with its inherent capacity for action, transform into speech. This is further confirmed by the fact that **dravya-vacana** is the object of the auditory sense.

**Question:** Why is speech not the object of other senses?

**Answer:** Because it is not suitable for their perception, just as the scent of a fragrant substance is not perceived by the taste sense.

**Question:** Is speech immaterial?

**Answer:** No, because speech is perceived by the senses, it is obstructed by material objects, it is disrupted by adverse winds, and it is overpowered by other factors. This proves that speech is material.

**Mind** is also of two types: **dravya-mana** (material mind) and **bhava-mana** (mental mind). 

**Bhava-mana** is **paudgalika** because it is characterized by perception and use, and it depends on pudgalas.

**Dravya-mana** is also **paudgalika** because pudgalas, which are conducive to the soul's well-being by facilitating the destruction and pacification of **jnana-avaran** (veil of knowledge) and **virya-antaraya** karmas, as well as the **anga-upanga** karmas, and by enabling the soul to contemplate virtues and vices, remember, and engage in other activities, transform into mind.

**Question:** Some argue that mind is a separate substance, devoid of transformations like form, and is merely an atom. Therefore, it is not **paudgalika**.

**Answer:** This argument is incorrect. Why? Let's examine it. This mind is either connected to the soul and the senses or unconnected. If it is unconnected, it cannot benefit the soul, nor can it serve as an advisor to the senses. If it is connected, then the atom of mind connected to one location cannot benefit other locations.

**Question:** Could it be that this mind, like a spinning wheel, moves around all locations due to the influence of an unseen force?

**Answer:** No, because the unseen force lacks such capacity. The unseen force, being immaterial and inactive, cannot initiate action elsewhere. However, a specific type of air, which is **paudgalika**, is capable of doing so.

Similarly, the **karman** body, like a physical body, produces results when it comes into contact with material objects like sugar and thorns. This indicates that the **karman** body is also **paudgalika**.

Page #339:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

[219] The A-dṛṣṭa is not the cause of action because it is not active and does not have the characteristic of touch, whereas the wind, being active and having the characteristic of touch, is the cause of pulsation in plants. The A-dṛṣṭa is the opposite of this. The wind that is expelled from the body by the soul, which is seeking the destruction of the obstacles to power, the destruction of the veil of knowledge, and the rise of the karma of the limbs and the limbs of the limbs, is called Prāṇa, which is characterized by inhalation. The wind that is drawn into the body by the soul is called Apāna, which is characterized by exhalation. Thus, Prāṇa and Apāna are also beneficial to the soul, because they are the cause of life. These three, namely, mind, Prāṇa, and Apāna, are material because their obstruction, etc., is seen by material things. The obstruction of the mind is seen by things that cause fear, such as lightning strikes. It is also seen by things that overwhelm it, such as alcohol. The obstruction of Prāṇa and Apāna is experienced by covering the mouth with the palms of the hands, cloth, etc., and by phlegm. The immaterial cannot be obstructed by material things. Therefore, the existence of the soul is established. Just as the movements of a mechanical image indicate the existence of its operator, so too, the actions of Prāṇa, Apāna, etc., indicate the existence of the active soul. 8564. Whether this is the only benefit of the Pudgala or there is another benefit, is explained in the next sūtra:

**Happiness, sorrow, life, and death are also benefits of the Pudgala.** [20]

$565. The result that arises from the ripening of external substances, etc., due to the internal cause of the rise of the Sāta and Asāta, is called happiness and sorrow, which are in the form of pleasure and pain. The karma of life, which is the cause of existence, arises from the soul's A-dṛṣṭa. Therefore, this A-dṛṣṭa is also inactive and therefore unable to initiate action elsewhere. It is seen that the particular substance called wind is itself active and has the characteristic of touch, and is the cause of pulsation in plants, but the A-dṛṣṭa is the opposite of this, and therefore cannot be the cause of action. The soul, which is seeking the destruction of the obstacles to power, the destruction of the veil of knowledge, and the rise of the karma of the limbs and the limbs of the limbs, expels the wind from the body, which is called Prāṇa, which is characterized by inhalation. The same soul draws the wind into the body, which is called Apāna, which is characterized by exhalation. Thus, these Prāṇa and Apāna are also beneficial to the soul, because they are the cause of life. These three, namely, mind, Prāṇa, and Apāna, are material because their obstruction, etc., is seen by material things. For example, the obstruction of the mind is seen by things that cause fear, such as lightning strikes. It is also seen by things that overwhelm it, such as alcohol. The obstruction of Prāṇa and Apāna is experienced by covering the mouth with the palms of the hands, cloth, etc., and by phlegm. But the immaterial cannot be obstructed by material things. This indicates that they are all material. And from this, the existence of the soul is established. Just as the movements of a mechanical image indicate the existence of its operator, so too, the actions of Prāṇa, Apāna, etc., indicate the existence of the active soul. 
8564. Whether this is the only benefit of the Pudgala or there is another benefit, is explained in the next sūtra:

**Happiness, sorrow, life, and death are also benefits of the Pudgala.** [20]

$565. The result that arises from the ripening of external substances, etc., due to the internal cause of the rise of the Sāta and Asāta, is called happiness and sorrow, which are in the form of pleasure and pain. 

1. प्राप्तः वन- आ., दि. 1, दि. 2, ता., ना.। 2. पेक्षेणा- आ., दि. 1, दि. 21 3. कुतः। प्रतिषा- ' ता.। 4. हस्ततलपुटादि- ता., ना. मु.। 5. -वेद्येऽन्त- मु.।

Page #340:
---------------------------
{220}
In the state of **sarvārṣasiddhi**, the cessation of the specific actions of **prāṇa** and **apāna** as described earlier, for a living being who is in the state of **sthiti** (existence), is called **jīvita** (life). The cessation of this is **maraṇa** (death). These things like happiness, etc., are the benefits that a living being receives from **pudgala**; because they arise only when the material causes are present. 

**Question:** Since the topic is about benefits, why is the word **upagraha** (dependence) used in the sūtra? 

**Answer:** It is not unnecessary. The word **upagraha** is used in the sūtra to show the benefits that are received from oneself. **Pudgala** also receive benefits from **pudgala**. For example, **kāsa** (bronze) etc. are benefited by **bhasma** (ashes) etc., **jala** (water) etc. are benefited by **kataka** (a type of stone) etc., and **ayaḥ** (iron) etc. are benefited by **udaka** (water) etc. 

**Question:** What is the purpose of the word **ca** (and) in the sūtra? 

**Answer:** It is for the purpose of **samuccaya** (collection). It is used to indicate that there are other benefits that are received from **pudgala**. For example, just as the body is a benefit received from **pudgala**, so are the senses like the eyes, etc. 

8566. Having shown the benefits received from non-living beings, the next sūtra shows the benefits received from living beings:

**Paraspuropagraho jīvānām ||21||**
(Mutual dependence is the benefit of living beings.)

8567. The word **paraspura** (mutual) is used in the sense of **karmavyatihara** (interaction of karma). **Karmavyatihara** is the same as **kriyāvyatihara** (interaction of actions). **Paraspura**'s **upagraha** is **paraspuropagraha** (mutual dependence). This is the benefit of living beings. 

**Question:** What is the benefit? 

**Answer:** The relationship of **svāmī** (master) and **bhṛtya** (servant), **ācārya** (teacher) and **śiṣya** (student), etc., is **paraspuropagraha**. The **svāmī** benefits the **bhṛtya** by giving him wealth, etc. The **bhṛtya** benefits the **svāmī** by speaking the truth and forbidding what is harmful. The **ācārya** benefits the **śiṣya** by giving him teachings that lead to happiness in both worlds and by making him perform actions according to those teachings. The **śiṣya** benefits the **ācārya** by behaving in a way that is pleasing to him. 

**Question:** Since there is a benefit, why is the word **upagraha** used again in the sūtra? 

**Answer:** Because of the previous 1. **kāraḥ** (cause). 

**Question:** Why? 

**Answer:** Because of **mūrti** (form) and **ā** (existence). 

**Question:** Why? 

**Answer:** Because of **-yāṇām kṛtopa** (benefits received from).

Page #341:
---------------------------
Chapter Five: On the Subject of Benefit, Why is the Term "Upgraha" Repeated?

The term "Upgraha" is repeated to demonstrate the fourfold nature of happiness, as mentioned earlier. The implication is that happiness, etc., are benefits bestowed upon living beings by other living beings.

**Specific Point:** In this section on benefit, the focus is on which substance benefits another and how. Therefore, the question arises: Can one substance benefit or harm another, distinct substance? If so, why is theism rejected in Jain philosophy? It is a well-established principle that the qualities and modes of one substance cannot enter another, distinct substance. Therefore, the idea that one substance can benefit another, distinct substance, becomes a matter of consideration.

Those philosophies that accept theism consider God as the efficient cause of every action. They argue that beings are ignorant and not masters of their own happiness and sorrow. They go to heaven or hell due to God's will. While it is acknowledged that beings experience these heavenly and hellish states, it is believed that God has a significant role in their attainment. If God desires, He can prevent beings from entering these states. If one substance is considered beneficial to another, then it would be tantamount to not rejecting theism. If this section on benefit has a different meaning, then its philosophical analysis is crucial. This point is further elaborated upon below.

All substances in the world possess their own qualities and modes. From the perspective of substance, they remain the same as they were in the infinite past, are the same today, and will remain the same in the future. However, from the perspective of modes, they are constantly changing. This change occurs within the limits of the substance. This is the nature of every substance. Therefore, any outcome that occurs in a substance is due to its own inherent capacity. A worldly being, bound by the substance of matter, attains liberation in due course, also due to its own inherent capacity. However, external factors are considered instrumental in the occurrence of this action, based on the inherent capacity of each substance. For example, a child has the capacity to learn, and when provided with the instrumentality of a teacher, books, etc., he becomes learned. Therefore, the teacher, etc., are instrumental in his learning. However, upon deeper reflection, it becomes clear that the teacher or books, etc., did not create intelligence in the child's soul. If these external factors had the capacity to create intelligence, then the teacher could have instilled intelligence in all the children who study under him. However, we observe that some remain foolish, some become moderately knowledgeable, and some become highly knowledgeable. On the one hand, a child cannot learn without a teacher, and on the other hand, if the child does not have the capacity to develop intelligence, then even with the teacher's best efforts, he will remain foolish. This shows that the teacher is instrumental in the creation of the action, but not the ultimate cause. In the belief in God, emphasis is placed on the role of the ultimate cause, while in this section on benefit, external instrumentality is acknowledged but not considered the ultimate cause. This is the intention behind the inclusion of this section on benefit.

Page #342:
---------------------------
[222] Sarvarthasiddhi
[51228568568. It is said that if it is necessary to be a benefactor of the existent, then time is also considered to be existent. Therefore, what is the benefit of time? This is explained in the following sutra:
Vartana, parinaama, kriyaa, paratva and aparatva are the benefits of time. ||22||
8569. The word vartana is formed by adding the suffix 'yut' to the root 'vrt' (to exist) in the feminine gender, which means 'that which exists' or 'mere existence'. Although dharma and other substances are themselves engaged in producing their own new modifications, their activity cannot occur without an external cooperating cause. Therefore, time is considered to be the cause of their activity, and this is called the benefit of vartana.
Question: What is the meaning of 'nij'?
Answer: The modification of the substance changes, and time is the one who changes it.
Question: If this is the case, then time becomes an active substance? For example, the student studies, and the teacher teaches. (Here, the teacher is an active substance.)
Answer: This is not a fault, because even in the case of a mere cause, the designation of a cause-agent is seen. For example, "The fire of the firewood teaches." In the same way, time is also a cause-agent.
Question: How is time known?
Answer: Even though there are specific actions like time, etc., and the cooking, etc., which are produced by time, etc., have their own established names like time, cooking, etc., the attribution of the name 'time' to them in the form of 'time is time', 'cooked rice is time', etc., indicates the existence of the main time, which is the cause of that name, because the secondary usage depends on the primary.
The modification of a substance, which is the cessation of one dharma and the production of another dharma, and which is devoid of any change, is called parinaama. For example, anger, etc., in a jiva, and color, etc., in pudgala. In the same way, there is parinaama in the substances of dharma, adharma, aakasha and kaala, which are the qualities of aguru, laghu, etc. (1. -yate vartate vartana- Mu. 2. Kaarishagni- A. 3. 'Hetunirdeshacha nimittamatre. Bhikshadishu darshanat. Hetunirdeshacha nimittamatre drashtavyaha. Yaavad bruyaanimitta karanamiti tavaddheturiti. Ki prayojanam? Bhikshadishu darshanat. Bhikshadishvapi nijdasyate bhiksha vasayanti kaarishagniradhyapayati iti.- Pa. Ma. Bha. 3, 1, 2, 261 4.-dishvasanjna- Mu. 5. Paakakaala: Mu.)

Page #343:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

[5123 8570]

**[223]**  A substance is generated by increase and decrease. The transformation of a substance in the form of *parispanda* is called *kriya*. It is of two types, based on the difference between *prayogika* and *vaisrashika*. *Prayogika* is the action of a cart, etc., while *vaisrashika* is the action of a cloud, etc.

There are two types of *paratva* and *apatva*: *kshetrakrta* and *kalakrta*. The present chapter deals with *kalakrta* *paratva* and *apatva*, as it is a topic of *kalopkaraprakarana*. All these *vartana* etc. *upkaras* indicate the existence of time.

**Objection:** It is sufficient to accept only the term *vartana* in the sutra. The *parinama* etc. are its differentiations, so their separate acceptance is meaningless.

**Solution:** The separate acceptance of *parinama* etc. is not meaningless, because it is a detailed explanation to indicate two types of time. Time is of two types: *paramarthakala* and *vyavaharakala*. *Paramarthakala* is characterized by *vartana*, while *vyavaharakala* is characterized by *parinama* etc.

The meaning is that a particular *kriya* which is delimited by another and is the cause of delimitation of another, is called time in this way. It exists in three forms: *bhuta*, *vartaman*, and *bhavishyat*. In *paramarthakala*, the term *kala* is primary, while the terms *bhuta* etc. are secondary. In *vyavaharakala*, the terms *bhuta* etc. are primary, while the term *kala* is secondary, because this type of usage is with respect to a substance having *kriya* and is the function of time.

Here, the objector says that the *upkaras* of the substances *dharma*, *adharma*, *akasha*, *pudgala*, *jiva*, and *kala* have been stated. Their *lakshana* has also been stated by the sutra " *upayogo lakshanam* " etc. Similarly, the general *lakshana* of *pudgalas* has also been stated by the sutra " *ajivakaya* " etc., but their specific *lakshana* has not been stated. Therefore, the next sutra says:

**[23]** *Sparsha, rasa, gandha, and varna* are the *pudgalas*.

**[8570]** That which is touched or the mere act of touching is called *sparsha*. It is of eight types: *mridu*, *kathina*, *guru*, *laghu*, *sita*, *ushna*, *snigdha*, and *ruksha*. That which is tasted or the mere act of tasting is called *rasa*. It is of five types: *tikta*, *amla*, *katu*, *madhura*, and *kashaya*.

Page #344:
---------------------------
## 224] Sarvarthasiddhi
[5124 6 571] That which is smelled or is merely the quality of smell is called *gandha*. It is of two types: *surabhi* (pleasant) and *durabhi* (unpleasant). That which is seen or is merely the quality of sight is called *varna*. It is of five types: *krishna* (black), *nila* (blue), *pita* (yellow), *shukla* (white), and *lohita* (red). These are the primary types, and each of them has countless, innumerable, and infinite variations.  *Sparsha* (touch), *rasa* (taste), *gandha* (smell), and *varna* (color) are called *sparsha-rasa-gandha-varna-vanta* because they possess these qualities. The *matup* suffix is used to indicate their eternal connection with *pudgala* dravya. For example, "Kshirinah Nyagrodhah" (the banyan tree is milky). In the sutra "Manubaspinah Pudgalah", the *pudgalas* are described as having form, and it has been explained that *rasa* etc. are always associated with form. Therefore, based on this sutra, it is established that *pudgalas* possess form, etc. So, is this sutra redundant? No, this is not a flaw. In the sutra "Nityavasthitanyarupaani", the eternal nature of *dharma* etc. is established, which implies that *pudgalas* are formless. To address this contradiction, the sutra "Rupinah Pudgalah" is stated. However, this sutra is meant to explain the specific nature of *pudgalas*.

8571. This sutra is stated to explain the remaining *vikara* (modifications) of *pudgalas*. They are: *shabda* (sound), *bandha* (bond), *saukshmya* (subtlety), *sthulya* (grossness), *samsthana* (arrangement), *andhakara* (darkness), *chhaya* (shadow), *atapas* (heat), and *udyota* (radiance). ||24||

8572. *Shabda* is of two types: *bhasharupa* (linguistic) and *abhasharupa* (non-linguistic). *Bhasharupa* *shabda* is of two types: *sakshara* (literate) and *anaksara* (illiterate). *Sakshara* *shabda* is used in scriptures and for communication between Aryans and Mlechchas. It includes Sanskrit and its opposite. *Anakshara* *shabda* is used to convey the nature of extraordinary knowledge of two senses and other beings. Both types of *shabda* are *prayogika* (practical). *Abhasharupa* *shabda* is of two types: 1. *surabhi-durabhi* (pleasant-unpleasant) etc. 2. *van-nirdhesha* (indication of possession) etc. *Man-nirdhesha* (indication of existence) etc.

Page #345:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

**Two types of sound:**  *praayogika* (experimental) and *vainasika* (natural). *Vaisasika* sound originates from things like bellows, etc. *Praayogika* sound is of four types, based on the differences between *tata*, *vitata*, *ghana*, and *soushira*.

* **Tata** sound originates from things like *pushkara*, *bheri*, and *dardura* made from leather.
* **Vitata** sound originates from things like stringed *veena* and *sughoṣa*.
* **Ghana** sound originates from striking things like *tal*, *ghanta*, and *lalana*.
* **Soushira** sound originates from blowing things like *vamsa*, *shankha*, etc.

**Two types of *bandha* (bond):** *vaisasika* and *praayogika*. *Vaisasika* *bandha* does not require human intervention. For example, the *bandha* that is the subject of lightning, meteor, cloud, fire, and rainbow, which arises from the qualities of *snigdha* (unctuous) and *ruksha* (dry), is *vaisasika*. *Praayogika* *bandha* arises from human intervention. It is of two types: *ajiva* (non-living) related and *jiva-ajiva* (living-non-living) related. *Praayogika* *bandha* related to *ajiva* is exemplified by things like *jatuka* (lac) and *astha* (wood). *Praayogika* *bandha* related to *jiva-ajiva* is the *bandha* of *karma* (action) and *no-karma* with living beings.

**Two types of *saukshyam* (subtlety):** *antya* (ultimate) and *apekshika* (relative). *Antya* subtlety is found in *paramanu* (atoms). *Apekshika* subtlety is found in things like *vilva* (wood apple), *amalaka* (gooseberry), and *badara* (jujube).

**Two types of *sthaulya* (grossness):** *antya* and *apekshika*. *Antya* grossness is found in the *maha-skandha* (great body) that pervades the universe. *Apekshika* grossness is found in things like *badara*, *amalaka*, *vilva*, and *tala* (palm tree).

***Sansthana* (form) is the same as *aakriti* (shape).** It is of two types: *ittham-lakshana* (described) and *anittham-lakshana* (undescribed). *Ittham-lakshana* *sansthana* is that which can be described as "this form is like this". Examples include *vrutta* (circle), *trikona* (triangle), *chatur-asra* (quadrilateral), *ayata* (rectangle), and *parimandala* (circumference). *Anittham-lakshana* *sansthana* is that which cannot be described as "this form is like this". Examples include the various forms of clouds, etc.

**Six types of *bheda* (difference):** *utkara*, *churna*, *khanda*, *churnika*, *pratar*, and *anu-chatan*.

* **Utkara** is the difference created by cutting things like wood with things like hands and blades.
* **Churna** is the difference created by grinding things like barley and wheat into things like *saktu* (flour) and *kanika* (grains).
* **Khanda** is the difference created by breaking things like pots into things like *kapala* (skull) and *shankara* (sugar).
* **Churnika** is the difference created by breaking things like *masa* (lentil) and *mudga* (mung bean).
* **Pratara** is the difference created by the different layers of clouds, etc.
* **Anu-chatan** is the difference created by the sparks that fly out when things like heated iron balls are struck with things like hammers.

***Tamo* (darkness) is the obstruction of vision.**

Page #346:
---------------------------
[226] Sarvarthasiddhi
[51256 573] The cause of darkness is the obstruction of light. Shadow is caused by the covering of light. It is of two kinds - one that is transformed into a change of color, etc., and the other that is merely a reflection. The heat and light caused by the sun, etc., is called *ātapa*. The light that originates from the moon, fireflies, etc., is called *udyota*. These words, etc., are the transformations of the pudgala substance. Therefore, the pudgalas are called *śabda*, *bandha*, *saukṣmya*, *sthaulya*, *saṃsthāna*, *bheda*, *tama*, *chāyā*, *ātapa*, and *udyota*. The word 'ca' in the sūtra indicates that the transformations of the pudgala, such as *nodana*, *abhighāta*, etc., which are well-known in the āgama, should be included. 6 573. To show the difference between these pudgalas, the next sūtra says:
*Aṇavaḥ skandhāś ca* ||25|| 8574. Those that are called 'anyante', i.e., spoken of, because of their ability to produce the transformations of touch, etc., in a single space, are called *aṇavaḥ*. This means that the *aṇu* is the smallest because it exists in a single space. It is so subtle that it is the beginning, the middle, and the end. It is said:
"That which is the beginning, the middle, and the end, and which cannot be perceived by the senses, is the indivisible substance called the *paramāṇu*."
Those in which there is the aggregation of the actions of grasping, placing, etc., in a gross form, are called *skandha*. In common usage, an action that occurs in one place is taken as a symbol for all places, therefore, the term *skandha* is also used for the *dvaṇuka*, etc., which are not capable of grasping, etc. Although there are infinite varieties of pudgalas, they are all of two kinds - *aṇu* and *skandha*. 1. Ni. Sa., Ga. 261

Page #347:
---------------------------
-5126 $ 576] Chapter Five
[227 The plural is used to indicate the infinite varieties of these two categories. The terms 'anu' and 'skandha' are used to denote these varieties, as explained earlier.
Anus are those that have touch, taste, smell, and color. Skandhas, on the other hand, are those that have sound, bond, subtlety, grossness, form, difference, shadow, heat, and radiance, as well as touch, etc.
8575. It is asked, whether the transformation of these pudgalas into the forms of anu and skandha is beginningless or has a beginning? It is asserted that it has a beginning because it is produced. If so, then tell us from what cause it is produced? In order to explain the cause of the production of skandhas, the following sutra is stated:
They are produced from the combination of differences. ||26|| 8576. The division of combinations due to the cause of duality is called difference. The coming together of separate entities is called combination. But there are two things, difference and combination, so the sutra should be in the dual number. The plural is used to indicate the inclusion of three. This means that skandhas are produced from difference, combination, and both difference and combination. For example, from the combination of two atoms, a two-region skandha is produced. From the combination of a two-region skandha and an atom, or from the combination of three atoms, a three-region skandha is produced. From the combination of two two-region skandhas, a three-region skandha and an atom, or from the combination of four atoms, a four-region skandha is produced. In this way, from the combination of countable, uncountable, infinite, and infinitely infinite atoms, skandhas with that many regions are produced. And from the difference of these same countable, etc., atoms, skandhas up to the two-region skandha are produced. In the same way, from the difference and combination that occur at the same time, 1. Third - Mu. 2. -khyeyanantaanam cha sangha- ta., Na. 3. Bhedadviprade- ta., A., Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #348:
---------------------------
2281 Sarvarthasiddhi
[5127 8 577 From the two factors of *bheda* (difference) and *samghata* (combination), *skandhas* (aggregates) with two regions and so on arise. Otherwise, it is by the difference of one from another and their combination. Thus, the cause of the origin of *skandhas* is stated. $ 577. To show the cause of the origin of *anu* (atom), it is said:
From *bheda* (difference), *anu* (atom) arises. ||27|| 8 578. "A rule is for the sake of establishing a truth that is already established." The origin of *anu* is from *bheda* (difference) alone, not from *samghata* (combination) nor from both *bheda* and *samghata*.
6579. It is said, when the origin of *skandhas* from *samghata* (combination) is already established, the inclusion of *bheda* and *samghata* is meaningless. To explain the purpose of including these two factors, it is said:
From *bheda* and *samghata*, *chakshusha* (visible) arises. ||28|| 8580. Even though produced from an infinite collection of infinite *paramanus* (atoms), some *skandhas* are *chakshusha* (visible) and some are *achakshusha* (invisible). Of these, how does the *achakshusha* become *chakshusha*? It is said: From *bheda* and *samghata*, *chakshusha* arises. Not from *bheda* alone. What is the reason for this? It is said: Due to the *bheda* (difference) of a *skandha* with subtle transformation, it does not lose its subtlety, and therefore remains *achakshusha* (invisible). Another *skandha* with subtle transformation, even though it undergoes *bheda* (difference), combines with another *samghata* (combination), and therefore loses its subtlety, giving rise to grossness, and becomes *chakshusha* (visible). And *samghata* from these two, *skandhas* with two regions and so on arise. The meaning is that when there is *bheda* (difference) from another *skandha* and *samghata* (combination) of another, then together *bheda* and *samghata* from these two also, the origin of *skandha* takes place. Thus, the cause of the origin of *skandhas* is stated.
8 577. Now, to show the cause of the origin of *anu* (atom), the next sutra says:
From *bheda* (difference), *anu* (atom) arises. ||27||
8 578. Any rule, even if it is already established, is for the sake of establishing that rule. The meaning is that *anu* (atom) arises from *bheda* (difference), even though this is already established, yet by constructing this sutra ' *anu* ', this rule is established that the origin of *anu* is only from *bheda* (difference). It does not arise from *samghata* (combination) nor from both *bheda* and *samghata*.
579. When the origin of *skandhas* from *samghata* (combination) is already established, then the inclusion of both *bheda* and *samghata* in the sutra is meaningless. Therefore, to explain the purpose of including these two factors, the next sutra says:
From *bheda* and *samghata*, *chakshusha* (visible) *skandha* arises. ||28||
8580. Even though produced from an infinite collection of infinite *paramanus* (atoms), some *skandhas* are *chakshusha* (visible) and some are *achakshusha* (invisible). Of these, how does the *achakshusha* become *chakshusha*? It is said: From *bheda* and *samghata*, *chakshusha* arises, not from *bheda* alone. This is the meaning of this sutra. Doubt: What is the reason for this? Solution: The same reason is explained further: Due to the *bheda* (difference) of a *skandha* with subtle transformation, it does not lose its subtlety, and therefore remains *achakshusha* (invisible). Another *skandha* with subtle transformation, even though it undergoes *bheda* (difference), combines with another *samghata* (combination), and therefore loses its subtlety, giving rise to grossness, and becomes *chakshusha* (visible). 1. ' *Siddh satyarambho niyamarthah* ' Nyayasangraha.
' *Bheda*

Page #349:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

**581.** It has been stated that the specific characteristics of substances like dharma, etc. have been mentioned, but the general characteristic has not been stated. That should be stated. It is stated:

**The characteristic of substance is sat.** ||29||

**8582.** The meaning of this sutra is that whatever is sat is substance.

**8583.** If this is so, then it should be stated what is sat. Therefore, the next sutra states:

**That which is endowed with utpada, vyaya, and dhrauvya is sat.** ||30||

**8584.** There are two types of substances: cetana (conscious) and acetana (non-conscious). They never abandon their own jati (category), yet due to the influence of both internal and external causes, they acquire a new state at every moment. This acquisition of a new state is called utpada. For example, the transformation of a lump of clay into a pot. Similarly, the abandonment of the previous state is called vyaya. For example, the abandonment of the shape of a lump of clay when a pot is created. Since it has an eternal and continuous nature, it does not undergo vyaya or udhaya (emergence), but remains stable. Therefore, it is called dhruva. The state or karma of this dhruva is called dhrauvya. For example, the presence of clay in the states of a lump of clay, a pot, etc. Thus, that which is endowed with utpada, vyaya, and dhrauvya is sat.

**Objection:** The word "yukta" (endowed with) is seen in the context of difference. For example, "Devadatta is endowed with a stick." Here, there is a difference between Devadatta and the stick. If we assume the same in the present case, then the absence of those three and the substance endowed with those three would result.

**Solution:** This is not a fault, because even in the absence of difference, the word "yukta" is seen in the context of a certain perspective of difference. For example, "The pillar is endowed with essence." In such a situation, since there is an inseparable relationship between those three, the use of the word "yukta" is appropriate.

**Alternatively:** The word "yukta" is used in the sense of samadhi (concentration). The meaning is that "yukta," "samahita" (concentrated), and "tadātmaka" (identical with that) are all synonyms. Therefore, the statement "sat is endowed with utpada, vyaya, and dhrauvya" means "sat is identical with utpada, vyaya, and dhrauvya."

**Note:** 1. "jahat" - आ., दि. 1, दि. 21 2. "provyuktam sad iti" - मु. .

Page #350:
---------------------------
[230] Sarvarthasiddhi
[51318585Prauvyayuktam sat utpadavyayadhrauvyatmakamiti yavat. Etad uktam bhavati - utpadadini dravyasya lakshanani. Dravyam lakshyam. Tatra paryayaathikanayaprekhyaya parasparato dravyacchantarabhavaha. Dravyathikanayaprekhyaya vyatirekena anuplabdheranarthantabhavaha. Iti lakshyalakshanabhava siddhih. 8585. Aha 'nityavasthanianyrupaani' ityuktam tatra na jnayate kim nityamityata aha
Tabhavaavyayam nityam ||31|| 8586. 'Tadbhavah' ityuchyate. Kastabhavah? Pratyabhijnanahetuta. Tadevedamiti smaranam
The meaning is that production, etc., are the characteristics of substance, and substance is the object. If we consider these from the perspective of the paryayaathika nay, they are distinct from each other and from substance. If we consider them from the perspective of the dravyathika nay, they are not found separately, and therefore they are not different. Thus, the relationship of object and characteristic is established.
Special meaning - Here, the characteristics of substance are described as production, destruction, and the nature of permanence. Production is the acquisition of a new paryaya without abandoning one's own jati due to both causes. Destruction is the abandonment of the previous paryaya. And permanence is the continuous existence of the anādi parinaamik nature. For example, when coal burns and becomes ash, the coal-like paryaya of pudgala is destroyed, and the ash-like paryaya is produced. But in both states, the pudgala substance remains. The pudgalatva never perishes, this is its permanence. The idea is that every substance is changing, and this change is happening all the time. For example, milk turns into curd after some time, and then buttermilk is made from the curd. Here, although there are three different states, milk, curd, and buttermilk, they are all of the same gorasa. Similarly, in every substance, even though there are differences in states, its anvay is found, therefore it is established as being endowed with production, destruction, and permanence. This is the common nature of every substance. Now the question arises, how can every substance be three-fold at the same time? Perhaps it can be considered as production and destruction due to the difference in time, because what is produced must be destroyed in due course. However, it cannot be considered as permanent in that state, because there is a contradiction in considering what is produced and destroyed as permanent. The solution is that these three qualities are considered in substance due to the difference in states. At the time when the previous state of the substance is destroyed, its new state is produced, yet its trikalik anvay nature remains. Acharya Samantabhadra has expressed this in these words - 'The one who desires a pot is sad when it is destroyed, the one who desires a crown is happy when it is produced, and the one who desires gold is neither sad nor happy, he remains neutral.' This sorrow, joy, and neutrality cannot happen without a reason at the same time, from this it is proved that every substance is endowed with production, destruction, and permanence.
8585. The sutra 'nityavasthanianyrupaani' has been said. There it is not known what is nitya, therefore the next sutra says
Not being detached from its bhavah (its jati) is nitya ||3||
8586. Now we explain the word tadbhavah. Doubt - What is 'tadbhavah'? 1. -The three grandmothers are substance. 2. The object. That paryaya - grandmother, mother, daughter. 1.

Page #351:
---------------------------
Chapter Five

**Recognition**

The cause of recognition is *tad-bhāva* (the state of being the same). It is not accidental. The word *bhāva* means "being." The being of that is *tad-bhāva*. The object that was seen before is recognized as the same by the same self, because of its being. If there were complete annihilation or only a new emergence, then there would be no possibility of remembrance. The worldly conduct that depends on remembrance would be contradicted. Therefore, it is certain that what is not subject to annihilation is *tad-bhāva-avyaya* (imperishable in its being), that is, eternal. However, this must be understood in a certain way. If eternality is accepted in an absolute sense, then there would be a contradiction with the process of the cause of the world and its cessation, because of the absence of the absence of otherness.

**Objection:** Is it not contradictory to say that the same thing is both eternal and non-eternal? If it is eternal, then there is no annihilation or emergence, and thus no contradiction with non-eternality. And if it is non-eternal, then there is no permanence, and thus no contradiction with eternality.

**Solution:** This is not contradictory, because of the principle of *arpita-anarpita-siddhi* (the establishment of the primary and secondary).

**Explanation:** An object is multi-faceted. Depending on the purpose, one of its qualities is made primary and is called *arpita* (primary) or *upaniita* (secondary). Conversely, when there is no purpose, even though a quality exists, it is not considered primary and is called *anarpita* (secondary). *Arpita* and *anarpita* are both *arpita-anarpita*. Because of this principle, there is no contradiction. For example, Devadatta has a father, a son, a brother, a nephew, and so on.

Page #352:
---------------------------
[232]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[5133 § 589
Relationships arising from causes like fatherhood and sonship do not contradict each other; due to the non-difference of the object of application. For example, with respect to the son, he is the father, and with respect to the father, he is the son, and so on. Similarly, there is no contradiction in the fact that a substance is eternal with respect to the general and non-eternal with respect to the particular. These general and particular are, in some way, the cause of the transaction due to their difference and non-difference.
8589. Here it is said, due to the fact that the real is subject to the transaction of many kinds of Nayas, the origin of the Skandhas from the aggregates of differences is justified. But this is doubtful, whether the aggregate is only due to combination, characterized by dyads, etc., or whether there is some other specific characteristic? It is said, "When there is combination, the aggregate arises from the bondage that is characterized by the result of oneness. Even if this is said, why then, in the case of the abandonment of the Pudgala-jati, is there bondage for some and not for others when there is combination? It is said, because even though they are all Pudgalas in terms of their jati, their infinite Paryayas undergo mutually distinct transformations, and therefore, the power that arises from this makes it appear that -
Bondage arises from the qualities of being oily and rough. || 330
$ 590. Due to external and internal causes, the oily Paryaya appears, and therefore, it is called oily. Similarly, due to roughness, it is called rough. The oily and the rough are oily-rough. Their state is the quality of being oily-rough. The quality of being oily is the Paryaya characterized by the quality of being slippery. The opposite transformation of this is the quality of being rough. The reason is indicated in the sutra, "From the quality of being oily-rough." This is the cause of
The type is   like Devadatta's father, son, brother, and nephew. Similarly, there are other relationships arising from causes like fatherhood and sonship, which do not lead to contradiction. When a particular dharma is predominant, it is considered in that context. For example, with respect to the son, he is the father, and with respect to the father, he is the son, and so on. Similarly, a substance is eternal with respect to the general and non-eternal with respect to the particular, so there is no contradiction. These general and particular are, in some way, the cause of the transaction due to their difference and non-difference.
8589. Doubt - Since the real is subject to the transaction of many kinds of Nayas, the origin of the Skandhas from the aggregates of differences, and the aggregates of differences themselves, may be justified, but it is doubtful whether the aggregate characterized by dyads, etc., is only due to combination, or whether there is some other specific characteristic? Solution - When there is combination, the aggregate arises from the bondage that is characterized by the result of oneness. Doubt - If this is the case, then explain why, even though all Pudgalas are of the same jati, there is bondage for some and not for others when there is combination? Solution - Because even though they are all Pudgalas in terms of their jati, their infinite Paryayas undergo mutually distinct transformations, and therefore, the power that arises from this makes it appear that -
Bondage arises from the qualities of being oily and rough. || 33 ||
8 590. Due to external and internal causes, the oily Paryaya appears, and therefore, it is called oily. Its etymology is "snihyate smeti snigdha". Similarly, due to roughness, it is called rough. The oily Pudgala's dharma is oiliness, and the rough Pudgala's dharma is roughness. The Paryaya of the Pudgala that is characterized by the quality of being slippery is oiliness, and the opposite transformation of this is roughness. The sutra indicates the reason as "snigdharukshatvat". The meaning is that
1. Skandhanamevutpa - di. 1, di. 2, a. | 2. - kuto'tra khalu di. 1, di. 2 1 3 -tyage sati mu. | 4. - hyate'sminniti mu.

Page #353:
---------------------------
-5135 § 593]
Chapter Five
[233
Bond is the result of the combination of two atoms. When two atoms with the qualities of *snigdha* (smooth) and *ruksha* (rough) come together, they form a *dwayanuka* (two-atom) *skandha* (aggregate). In the same way, *skandhas* with *sanchya* (countable), *asanchya* (uncountable), and *ananta* (infinite) regions are formed. The *snigdha* quality has one, two, three, four, *sanchya*, *asanchya*, and *ananta* variations. Similarly, the *ruksha* quality also has one, two, three, four, *sanchya*, *asanchya*, and *ananta* variations. These qualities are present in atoms. Just as the *snigdha* quality is present in water, goat, cow, buffalo, and camel milk and ghee in increasing degrees, and the *ruksha* quality is present in dust, particles, and sugar in decreasing degrees, similarly, the *snigdha* and *ruksha* qualities are also present in atoms in varying degrees.
§ 591. When the bond is formed due to the *snigdha* and *ruksha* qualities, and there is no distinction in the bond, then the following sutra explains the reason for the non-existence of undesirable qualities:
There is no bond of *jghanya* (inferior) qualities. ||34||
§ 592. Here, *jghanya* means inferior, and *guna* means part. Those who have *jghanya* qualities, i.e., whose power is inferior, are called *jghanya* qualities. There is no bond of those *jghanya* qualities. For example, there is no bond between one *snigdha* power-part and another *snigdha* power-part, or between one *snigdha* power-part and two or more, *sanchya*, *asanchya*, and *ananta* power-parts. Similarly, there is no bond between one *snigdha* power-part and one *ruksha* power-part, or between one *snigdha* power-part and two or more, *sanchya*, *asanchya*, and *ananta* *ruksha* power-parts. Similarly, the same applies to one *ruksha* power-part.
§ 593.  Except for these *jghanya* *snigdha* and *ruksha* power-parts, the bond of other *snigdha* and *ruksha* atoms is generally obtained. Therefore, to explain that those who are not bondable are the subject of prohibition, the following sutra is stated:
There is no bond of those of the same kind when the qualities are equal. ||35||

Page #354:
---------------------------
Sarvarthasiddhi

[5136 $594$ 594. The term 'sādṛśya' (similarity) is used to denote the concept of similarity of class. The term 'guṇasāmya' (equality of attributes) is used to denote the concept of equality of shares. This means that there is no bondage between: 
- Two sticky (snigdha) substances with double the attributes and two non-sticky (rūkṣa) substances with double the attributes
- Three sticky substances with double the attributes and two non-sticky substances with double the attributes
- Two sticky substances with double the attributes and two sticky substances with double the attributes
- Two non-sticky substances with double the attributes and two non-sticky substances with double the attributes
and so on.

8595. If this is the case, then what is the purpose of using the term 'sādṛśya' (similarity)? The term 'sādṛśya' is used to denote that even in the case of dissimilar attributes, there can be bondage between similar classes and dissimilar classes.

8596. Therefore, it is stated that there is bondage between substances with two or more additional attributes, but not for others. What are these substances with two or more additional attributes? They are the ones with four attributes. The term 'ādi' (etc.) indicates that this principle applies to substances with more than four attributes as well. The additional attribute here refers to the 'two or more' part. Due to this, there is no conception of substances with five, six, seven, eight, countable infinite, or innumerable attributes. Thus, the bondage is stated for substances with two or more additional attributes, whether of similar or dissimilar classes, but not for others. For example, a two-attribute sticky substance does not have bondage with a one-attribute sticky, two-attribute sticky, or three-attribute sticky substance. However, it does have bondage with a four-attribute sticky substance. Further, that same two-attribute sticky substance does not have bondage with a five-attribute, six-attribute, seven-attribute, countable infinite-attribute, or innumerable-attribute sticky substance. Similarly, a three-attribute sticky substance has bondage with a five-attribute sticky substance, but not with the rest.

Page #355:
---------------------------
There is no bond between a single-atom and other atoms with one, two, or three units of *snigdha* (smooth) or *ruksha* (rough) power. However, there is a bond with an atom having four units of *ruksha* power. Similarly, there is no bond between an atom with two units of *ruksha* power and atoms with five or more units of *ruksha* power. Likewise, the bond between atoms with three or more units of *ruksha* power and atoms with two or more units of *ruksha* power should be understood. This principle applies to atoms of different types as well. As it is said:

"A bond occurs between two atoms with the same type of power, when one has two more units of power than the other. This applies to both *snigdha* and *ruksha* atoms. A bond also occurs between a *snigdha* and a *ruksha* atom, following the same principle. However, a bond with an atom having a lower power is completely prohibited."

The word "tu" in the sutra is an adjective, which negates the prohibition of the bond and establishes the bond.

8597. Why is it said that a bond occurs with an atom having more power, but not with an atom having the same power? To answer this, the next sutra says:

"A bond with an atom having two more units of power is transformative."

8598. The word "guna" (power) is used in this sutra, referring to the "more power" mentioned earlier. The transformative nature of a bond is like that of wet jaggery. Just as wet jaggery, with its higher sweetness, transforms the dust particles on it by absorbing their properties, similarly, an atom with more power transforms an atom with less power. According to this principle, an atom with two units of *snigdha* or *ruksha* power is transformed by an atom with four units of *snigdha* or *ruksha* power. This leads to the abandonment of the previous states and the emergence of a new, distinct state, resulting in unity. Otherwise, like white and black threads, even if they are in contact, they would not be transformative and would remain separate.

Page #356:
---------------------------
## 236] Sarvarthasiddhi

[5137 $ 598] If all were to remain in a separate form due to [the principle of] kत्वात्, then, according to the stated law, upon binding, the karma of jñāna-āvaraṇa etc. would become established as a state like the tri-sāgara, koṭi-koṭi-cādi etc. It would remain so. But, upon binding by the stated law, the karma of jñāna-āvaraṇa etc. becomes established as a state like the tri-sāgara, koṭi-koṭi-cādi etc.

**Special Meaning:** Here, the question of how one atom etc. binds with another atom etc. has been considered. Rough and smooth are opposing qualities. That which has the smooth quality does not have the rough quality, and that which has the rough quality does not have the smooth quality. These qualities are the cause of binding. But, this does not mean that the mere harmony of rough and smooth qualities is the cause of binding, because if that were the case, then not a single pudgala atom could remain unbound. Therefore, it has been explained here through the law of vidhi-niṣedha which pudgala atoms etc. bind with each other and which do not. Those pudgala-āṇus which have the smooth and rough qualities with a low potency do not bind. Similarly, when there is equality of qualities, then the similar ones do not bind, but only those pudgala atoms etc. which have two or more qualities bind with those pudgala atoms etc. which have two or fewer qualities. This is the rule: binding occurs between those with the smooth quality and those with the smooth quality, between those with the rough quality and those with the rough quality, and between those with the smooth quality and those with the rough quality. According to this, the following arrangement results:

| **Serial No.** | **Quality Share** | **Similar Binding** | **Dissimilar Binding** |
|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | Low + Low | No | No |
| 2 | Low + One or more than one higher than low | No | Higher than low + Equal to higher than low |
| 3 | Higher than low + One more than higher than low | No | Higher than low + Two or more than two higher than low |
| 4 | Higher than low + Two or more than two higher than low | No | Higher than low + Three or more than three higher than low |
| 5 | Higher than low + Three or more than three higher than low | No | No |
| 6 | Higher than low + Four or more than four higher than low | No | No |

This binding arrangement, as stated in the Tattvārtha-sūtra, follows the Pravacana-sāra. The Pravacana-sāra also instructs on the binding arrangement in the same way, but the binding arrangement mentioned in the Vargaṇā-khaṇḍa of the Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama is slightly different. To understand this properly, a bracket is given below:

| **Serial No.** | **Quality Share** | **Similar Binding** | **Dissimilar Binding** |
|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | Low + Low | No | No |
| 2 | Low + One or more than one higher than low | No | Higher than low + Equal to higher than low |
| 3 | Higher than low + One more than higher than low | No | Higher than low + Two or more than two higher than low |
| 4 | Higher than low + Two or more than two higher than low | No | Higher than low + Three or more than three higher than low |
| 5 | Higher than low + Three or more than three higher than low | No | No |
| 6 | Higher than low + Four or more than four higher than low | No | No |

[Low ares]

Page #357:
---------------------------
[237
-51388 600]
Chapter Five $ 599. The definition of dravya as "that which is endowed with production, destruction, and permanence" has been stated. Now, to explain the definition of dravya in another way, the following sutra is stated:
Dravya is that which has guna and paryaya. ||38|| 8600. Guna and paryaya are called guna-paryaya. Dravya is that which has these. Here, the use of the suffix 'matup' has been explained earlier. The meaning is that dravya is somehow different from its guna and paryaya, hence the use of the suffix 'matup'. Question: What are guna and paryaya? Answer: Guna are those that are inherent (anvayi), and paryaya are those that are non-inherent (vyatireki). Dravya is that which is endowed with both. It has been said:
"The characteristic that differentiates a dravya from other dravyas is called guna, and the modification of a dravya is called paryaya. Dravya is endowed with both of these. It is also eternal and self-evident." The meaning is that that by which one dravya is distinguished from another is guna. It is by this guna that the existence of that dravya is established. If there were no differentiating guna, there would be a mixture of dravyas. For example, the jiva dravya is distinguished from pudgala etc. by guna such as knowledge etc., and pudgala etc. are distinguished by guna such as form etc. If there were no distinction due to guna such as knowledge etc., there would be a mixture. Therefore, in relation to the general, knowledge etc. are the guna of the jiva, and form etc. are the guna of pudgala etc. Their modifications, which are different in a specific way, are called paryaya. For example, knowledge of a pot, knowledge of a cloth, anger, pride, smell, color, intense, and mild etc. That which is somehow different from these and is a collection is called dravya. If the collection were to be considered completely non-different, then there would be the consequence of the non-existence of everything. For example, if there is a collection of things that are mutually different, then due to the non-existence of one after another, there would be the non-existence of the collection. 
8599. The definition of dravya as "that which is endowed with production, destruction, and permanence" has been stated. Now, to explain the definition of dravya in another way, the following sutra is stated:
Dravya is that which has guna and paryaya. ||38||
8600. That which has both guna and paryaya is called guna-paryaya, and that is dravya. Here, the use of the suffix 'matup' has been explained earlier. The meaning is that dravya is somehow different from its guna and paryaya, hence the use of the suffix 'matup'. Question: What are guna and paryaya? Answer: Guna are those that are inherent (anvayi), and paryaya are those that are non-inherent (vyatireki). Dravya is that which is endowed with both. It has been said:
"The characteristic that differentiates a dravya from other dravyas is called guna, and the modification of a dravya is called paryaya. Dravya is endowed with both of these. It is also eternal and self-evident." The meaning is that that by which one dravya is distinguished from another is guna. It is by this guna that the existence of that dravya is established. If there were no differentiating guna, there would be a mixture of dravyas. For example, the jiva dravya is distinguished from pudgala etc. by guna such as knowledge etc., and pudgala etc. are distinguished by guna such as form etc. If there were no distinction due to guna such as knowledge etc., there would be a mixture. Therefore, in relation to the general, knowledge etc. are the guna of the jiva, and form etc. are the guna of pudgala etc. Their modifications, which are different in a specific way, are called paryaya. For example, knowledge of a pot, knowledge of a cloth, anger, pride, smell, color, intense, and mild etc. That which is somehow different from these and is a collection is called dravya. If the collection were to be considered completely non-different, then there would be the consequence of the non-existence of everything. For example, if there is a collection of things that are mutually different, then due to the non-existence of one after another, there would be the non-existence of the collection.

Page #358:
---------------------------
[238]
Sarvarthasiddhi
[$139 § 601. Because of being different from each other. If this form is considered to be different from the rasa etc., then the aggregate is also different from them. And the aggregate which is different from the rasa etc. and is not different from the form, how can it not be different from the rasa etc.? Therefore, only form is the aggregate. And one form cannot be an aggregate. Therefore, there is no aggregate. And due to the absence of the aggregate, there is also the absence of the aggregate of those who are different from it. Thus, there is the absence of everything. In the same way, it should be said with respect to rasa etc. Therefore, if one wants to accept the aggregate, then one must accept it as being different in some way.
§ 601. After describing the characteristics of the mentioned substances, it is established that the substance is the subject of that characteristic. Therefore, to indicate the substance that has not been mentioned, the next sutra says
Time is also a substance. ||39||
1
It is. The explanation is as follows: If an aggregate of mutually different qualities is considered to be one and indivisible, then the absence of the aggregate and everything else is obtained, because those qualities are mutually different. The form is different from the rasa etc. Now, if their aggregate is considered to be indivisible, then the form which is different from the rasa etc. and the aggregate which is indivisible from it, how can it not be different from the rasa etc.? i.e. it will be. And thus, the aggregate is obtained as only form. But one form quality cannot be an aggregate, therefore, the absence of the aggregate is obtained. And due to the absence of the aggregate, there is also the absence of the aggregates which are different from it. Thus, there is the absence of the aggregate and everything else. In the same way, it should be said with respect to rasa etc. Therefore, if the aggregate is accepted, then it must be accepted as being different in some way.
Special Meaning - It has been said before that there is a substance with production, destruction, and permanence. Here, the characteristic of the substance is stated in a different way. In this, the substance is described as having qualities and their permutations. The point is that every substance is merely a mass of infinite qualities and their permutations that occur in sequence. Qualities are said to be pervasive everywhere and permutations are said to be exclusive. This means that those which maintain uniformity in the stream are called qualities and those which make it appear different are called permutations. In the jiva, there is never a break in the stream of knowledge etc., in the pudgala, there is never a break in the stream of form, rasa etc., in the dharma dravya, there is never a break in the stream of the cause of motion, in the adharma dravya, there is never a break in the stream of the cause of rest, in the akasha, there is never a break in the stream of the cause of penetration, and in the kala dravya, there is never a break in the stream of existence, therefore, they are the qualities of that particular substance. But those qualities do not remain the same forever. If the qualities of the eternal substances are left out, even then, a clear change is observed in the qualities of the jiva and the pudgalas at every moment. For example, the knowledge quality of the jiva is sometimes in the form of mati jnana and sometimes in the form of shruti jnana in the state of samsara. Therefore, these mati jnana etc. are the permutations of the knowledge quality. In the same way, it should be understood in other qualities as well. The substance always remains in these quality-like permutations, therefore, it is said to be having qualities and permutations. Nevertheless, qualities and permutations should not be considered completely different from the substance. Both of them together are the soul of the substance. This means that there is no independent substance apart from qualities and permutations. § 601. By indicating the characteristic of the previously mentioned substances, it is obtained that the substance is the subject of that characteristic. Therefore, to indicate the substance that has not been mentioned yet, the next sutra says
Time is also a substance. ||39||

Page #359:
---------------------------
-5139 6 602] Chapter Five
[239 8602. Question: What is the remaining part of the sentence "dravya"? Answer: It is "dravya". Question: Why is it "dravya"? Answer: Because it possesses the characteristics of a dravya. Two characteristics of dravya have been mentioned: "That which is endowed with production, destruction, and dhrauvya is sat" and "That which has guna and paryaya is dravya". Both these characteristics are present in time. For example, dhrauvya is self-caused in time, because it establishes the order of its own nature. Destruction and production are other-caused, and they are also self-caused in relation to the increase and decrease of the guna of heavy and light. Similarly, there are two types of guna in time: ordinary and extraordinary. The extraordinary guna is the cause of activity, and the ordinary guna is the nature of being inanimate, formless, subtle, heavy, and light. Paryaya can also be attributed to the characteristics of destruction and production. Therefore, since time possesses both types of characteristics, it is established that time is a dravya like space, etc. The reason for its existence has been explained like that of dharma, etc., as "The characteristic of time is activity". Question: Why is time mentioned separately? It should have been mentioned along with dharma, etc., in the first sutra, which would then be "Ajivikaaya dharmadharmaaakaashakaalapudgalaah". Answer: This is not a valid question, because if it were mentioned there, it would be considered a kaya. But time is not considered a kaya, because it lacks the concept of both primary and secondary pradeshaprachaya. The primary pradeshaprachaya of dharma, etc., has been mentioned in sutras like "Asankhyeyaah pradeshaah". Similarly, the secondary pradeshaprachaya of an atom, which has only one pradesha, has been mentioned in relation to the nay of knowing the past and future. But time does not have the concept of both types of pradeshaprachaya, therefore it is not a kaya. Furthermore, if time is included in the first sutra, then in the sutra "Nishkriyaani cha", where dharma, etc., up to space are said to be inactive, time would also become active, just like jiva and pudgala become active. Question: To avoid this flaw, should time be placed before space? Answer: This is not correct, because the sutra "Aa aakaashaadekadravyaani" states that 1. iti. Kimartha- Mu. 2. -taraprasha- Mu. 3. -pudgalaadiinaam Mu. 4. -shyete. Aa aaka- Aa., Di. 1

Page #360:
---------------------------
## 2401 Sarvarthasiddhi

[5139 8602] It would be so. Therefore, a separate explanation of time is being made. If there are many substances, what is the proof of this? There are as many Kalaanu as there are regions of the Lokakasha, and they are inactive. In each region of the Lokakasha, one Kalaanu is spread throughout the Lokakasha and arranged. It is said:

"In each region of the Lokakasha, there are as many Kalaanu as there are grains of sand.
They should be considered like the heaps of grains."

They are formless due to the absence of qualities like form.

**Explanation:** If Kala is placed before Akasha, it acquires the status of a single substance. All these defects should not remain, therefore, a separate explanation of Kala is given.

**Doubt:** Kala is many substances, what is the proof of this?

**Solution:** There are as many Kalaanu as there are regions of the Lokakasha, and they are inactive. This means that one Kalaanu is present in each region of the Lokakasha. It is also said: "In each region of the Lokakasha, those that are present like heaps of grains of sand, know them as Kalaanu." These Kalaanu are formless because they are devoid of qualities like form.

**Special Note:** Earlier, the existence of the first five substances was discussed. Here, the sixth substance, Kala, is being considered. There are two opinions in the Shvetambar tradition regarding whether Kala is a substance or not. One opinion accepts Kala as a substance, while the other does not consider Kala as an independent substance. According to this second opinion, the form of time that is experienced as day-night, hour-minute, moment-instant, etc., due to the Sun, etc., is a modification of the Pudgala substance. But the question to be considered is: What is the cause of the transformation of these living beings, Pudgala, etc., substances? If it is said that being born, being destroyed, and remaining constant are the nature of every substance, then what is the need to believe in another cause? To this question, the argument is that if the transformation of every substance is considered to be entirely due to its nature, then what is the objection to considering motion, rest, and perception as entirely due to its nature? And in such a situation, only two substances, Jiva and Pudgala, would remain, and the absence of other substances would be obtained. Why only this? Even the bondage of Jiva and Pudgala, and Pudgala and Pudgala, would have to be considered entirely natural. There would be no need to believe in the cause-effect relationship, and in such a state, even a liberated Jiva would naturally become bound, and a worldly Jiva would become liberated without any effort. If it is said that motion, rest, etc., are actions, and all actions occur only when these two, cause and material, come together, therefore, the existence of Dharma, Adharma, and Akasha substances is accepted as the cause of actions like motion, rest, and perception, then what is the harm in accepting the existence of Kala substance as the cause of the transformation of every substance? That is, nothing. Considering this, the existence of Kala substance is proved.

Still, this Kala substance is neither countless-regioned nor infinite-regioned like Jiva and other substances, but there are as many Kala substances as there are regions of the Lokakasha, and each Kala substance is present in each region of the Lokakasha. The explanation is as follows:

There are two types of expansion: horizontal expansion and vertical expansion. The expansion of regions is called horizontal expansion, and the expansion of non-causal modifications is called vertical expansion. Akasha is infinite-regioned because it is present everywhere, Dharma and Adharma are countless-regioned because they are present in countless regions, and Jiva is countless-regioned because it is present in countless regions.

Page #361:
---------------------------
## Chapter Five

**8603.** The proof of the main time, which is characterized by its duration, has been stated. But what is the proof of the practical time, which is known through the process of change, etc.? To explain this, the next sutra says:

**It is infinite time.** (4)

**8604.** Although the present time is one moment, it is called infinite time because the past and future are infinite times. Or, this sutra is said to determine the main time. The meaning is that infinite permutations occur due to the quality of duration, and...

Page #362:
---------------------------
## 242]

**[5141 8605]**  A single Kalaanu is also considered infinite by convention. However, time is a very subtle part of Kala, and its aggregates like Avali, etc., should be understood. **[8605]** It has been said that "Dravya is with Guna and Paryaya." Now, to explain what Guna is, the next Sutra says:

**Those that reside in Dravya continuously and are devoid of Guna are Guna.** [41]

**[8606]** Those that have Dravya as their abode are called Dravyaashraya, and those that are devoid of Guna are called Nirguna. Thus, Guna is characterized by both these qualities. The epithet "Nirguna" in the Sutra is used to negate Vyanyuka, etc. They too reside in the Dravya of their cause, the Paramanu, and are endowed with Guna. Therefore, by the epithet "Nirguna," they are excluded.

**Doubt:**  All Paryayas like Ghatasansthana, etc., reside in Dravya and are Nirguna. Therefore, according to the above definition of Guna, they too should be considered Guna.

**Solution:** The epithet "Dravyaashraya" in the Sutra means "those that always reside in Dravya are Guna." Thus, by the epithet "always," Paryayas are excluded, i.e., the definition of Guna does not apply to Paryayas because Paryayas are occasional.

**Special Note:** It has been said earlier that Dravya is with Guna and Paryaya. Here, the nature of Guna is being considered. Since Dravya has been described as having Guna and Paryaya, it is clear that Guna resides in Dravya, i.e., Dravya is the base and Guna is the dependent. However, this should not be understood as a complete separation between the base and the dependent, like Dahi and Kund, because even though Guna resides in Dravya, it is not entirely different from it. Just as oil pervades all the parts of sesame seeds, similarly, each Guna pervades all the parts of Dravya equally. However, this characteristic would also apply to Vyanyuka, etc., because Vyanyuka, etc., are also...

Page #363:
---------------------------
[243
-5142 $ 608]
Chapter Five $ 607. The word "parinaama" has been mentioned many times. In response to the question of what its meaning is, it is said:
That which is, is parinaama. ||42|| $ 608. Some believe that qualities are different from substance. Is this your (Jain) view? No, it is said that although qualities are somewhat different from substance due to the difference in designation, etc., they are not different from substance due to their non-separation from it and their being its parinaama. If this is so, then tell us what parinaama is. To determine this, it is said: The way in which substance, such as dharma, etc., exists is called tadbhaava or tattva, and this is called parinaama. It is of two types: anaadi and saadi. Of these, the motion, attachment, etc., of substance, such as dharma, etc., are anaadi in relation to the general, and saadi in relation to the specific.
Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Tattvarthavritti, known as Sarvarth Siddhi.
They reside in their fundamental atomic substance. Therefore, those that are themselves devoid of specific qualities are called qualities. It is a rule that just as qualities are found in substance, other qualities are not found in qualities. Therefore, qualities are themselves devoid of specific qualities. Thus, although those that reside in substance and are themselves devoid of specific qualities are called qualities, this characteristic of qualities is also found in synonyms. Because they too reside in substance and are themselves devoid of specific qualities. Therefore, to eliminate this fault of overlapping, those that reside in substance should be understood as those that always reside in substance. Thus, the nature of qualities has been considered. Another name for qualities is "vishesha". Those that cause one substance to be different from another substance are called vishesha, i.e., qualities. This is the meaning of the statement. There are infinite such qualities in every substance. Some of them are general and some are specific. Those that are found in multiple substances are called general qualities, and those that express the specific nature of each substance are called specific qualities.
$607. The word parinaama has been mentioned many times; but what is its meaning? In response to this question, the next sutra gives the answer:
Its being, i.e., its constant change, is parinaama. ||421
6 608. Or, some believe that qualities are different from substance. Is this accepted in your (Jain) view? No, it is said that although qualities are somewhat different from substance due to the difference in designation, etc., they are not found to be different from substance, and they are not different because they are the parinaama of substance. If this is so, then tell us what parinaama is. To determine this, it is said: The way in which substance, such as dharma, etc., exists is called tadbhaava or tattva, and this is called parinaama. It is of two types: anaadi and saadi. Of these, the motion, attachment, etc., of substance, such as dharma, etc., are anaadi in relation to the general, and saadi in relation to the specific.
. Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Tattvarthavritti, known as Sarvarth Siddhi.
1. Hetutvaapeksha- Mu.

Page #364:
---------------------------
8609. The nature of the non-living (ajiva) has been explained. Now, the nature of the next category, asrava, is to be explained. Therefore, to clarify this, the following sutra is stated:
Body, speech, and mind are the actions (yoga). ||1||
8610. The words "body" etc. have been explained earlier. "Karma" and "action" are synonyms. The action of body, speech, and mind is called yoga. This is the meaning. The movement of the soul's regions is yoga. It is of three types, based on the difference in the cause: body yoga, speech yoga, and mind yoga. The explanation is as follows: When the karma of the obstruction of energy (virya) is destroyed and pacified, the movement of the soul's regions, which is based on the support of one of the seven types of body categories, such as generosity, is called body yoga. When the support of the speech categories, obtained from the arising of the karma called "body," is present, and when the inner speech attainment is obtained by the destruction and pacification of the karma of the obstruction of energy and the covering of the non-eternal letters, etc., the movement of the soul's regions, which is directed towards the speech category, is called speech yoga. When the inner mind attainment is obtained by the destruction and pacification of the karma of the obstruction of energy and the covering of the nine sense organs, and when the support of the mind categories, which are external causes, is present, the movement of the soul's regions, which is directed towards the mind category, is called mind yoga. It should be known that the movement of the soul's regions, which is based on the three types of categories of the liberated soul (sayogakevali), when the karma of the obstruction of energy and the karma of the covering of knowledge are destroyed, is also yoga.
8611. We accept that there are three types of actions (yoga). Now, tell us: 1. अथाजीवप- म.। आह जीवाजीवप- ता., ना.। इत्यजीवप- दि. 2। 2. आत्मन: प्रदे- आ. दि. 1. दि. 2। 3. अभ्युपगत आदि- मु.।

Page #365:
---------------------------
-613 § 615
What is the characteristic of *āsrava*? It is the *yoga* spoken of in relation to the *samsāri* (transmigrating) being, that is *āsrava*. ||2||
Chapter Six
8612. Just as the door of a reservoir is called *āsrava* because it is the cause of the water flowing in, so *yoga*, being the channel through which *karma* flows into the soul, is called *yoga āsrava*.
8613. It is said that *karma* is of two kinds: *puṇya* (meritorious) and *pāpa* (demeritorious). Is *yoga* the cause of *āsrava* in general, or is there some specific characteristic? To explain this, the next *sūtra* says:
[245
*śubha yoga* is the *āsrava* of *puṇya*, and *aśubha yoga* is the *āsrava* of *pāpa*. ||3||
8614. Question: What is *śubha yoga* and what is *aśubha yoga*? Answer: Violence, stealing, and sexual misconduct, etc., are *aśubha kāya yoga* (demeritorious bodily *yoga*). False speech, harsh speech, and uncultured speech, etc., are *aśubha vāc yoga* (demeritorious verbal *yoga*). Thoughts of killing, envy, and jealousy, etc., are *aśubha mano yoga* (demeritorious mental *yoga*). The opposite of these are *śubha kāya yoga*, *śubha vāc yoga*, and *śubha mano yoga* (meritorious bodily, verbal, and mental *yoga*). Question: What is the reason for the distinction between *śubha* and *aśubha yoga*? Answer: *Yoga* that leads to meritorious results is *śubha yoga*, and *yoga* that leads to demeritorious results is *aśubha yoga*. It is not that *śubha* and *aśubha yoga* are caused by *śubha* and *aśubha karma*. If this were the case, then there would be no such thing as *śubha yoga*, because *śubha yoga* is also considered to be the cause of the bondage of *karma* such as *jñāna āvaraṇa* (veil of knowledge). Therefore, the definition of *śubha* and *aśubha yoga* given here is correct. That which purifies the soul, or by which the soul is purified, is *puṇya*, such as *sātavedanīya* (that which is experienced in the next life). And that which protects the soul from *śubha* (meritorious) is *pāpa*, such as *asātavedanīya* (that which is not experienced in the next life).
8615. Does this *āsrava* produce the same results for all transmigrating beings, or is there some 1. *āsravaṇahetu* - *mu.* (mouth), *tā.* (tongue), *nā.* (nose). 2. *pāpam*. *asadve* - *mu.* 3. *samsārisama ā.* (transmigrating beings), *tā.* (tongue), *nā.* *samsārasama* etc. 2.

Page #366:
---------------------------
## 246] Sarvarthasiddhi
[6148 -616] Vishesha ityatra uchyate
Sakashayaakashayayoh sampraayikaryapathayoḥ ||4|| 8616. Swaamibhedadaasravabhedaḥ. Swaamini dvau sakashayo'kashayashcheti. Kashayah krodhaadiḥ. Kashayaiva kashayah. Kaḥ upamārthaḥ. Yatha kavaayo nayagraodhaadiḥ śleşhahetuḥ tatha krodhaadirapyātmanaḥ karmaśleşhahetuṭvaat kashayaiva kashay iti uchyate. Saha kashayena vartate iti sakashayah. Na vidyate kashayo yasyeti akashayah. Sakashayaścākashayashca sakashayaakashayo tayoḥ sakashayaakashayayoh. Sampraayah sansaraḥ tatprayojanam karma sampraayikam. Iiranamiiryaa yogah gatirityarthaḥ. Tadārakaṁ karma iiryaapatham. Sampraayikam ca iiryaapatham ca sampraayikaryapathe. Tayoḥ sampraayikaryapathayoḥ. Yathaaśankhyamabhisambandhaḥ sakashayasyaatmano mithyaadṛṣṭyaadeḥ sampraayikasya karmaṇ aasravo bhavati. Akashayasya upashantakashayādeḥ iiryaapathasya karmaṇ aasravo bhavati.
$ 617. Aadaavuddishtasyasravasya bhedapratipaadanartham ahaa indriyakashayaavratakriyaah panchachatuhpanchapanchavimshatisankhyaah poorvasya medah ||5||
8618. Atra indriyaadiinaam panchaadibhiryathaaśankhyamabhisambandhaḥ veditavyah. Indriyaani pancha. Visheshta hai? Ab isi baat batlaaneke liye aageka satra kahte hain
Kashayasahit aur kashayaraahit aatmaka yog kramese saampraayik aur iiryaapatha karmake aasravaroop hai ||4||
8616. Swaami ke bhed se aasrav mein bhed hai. Swaami do prakaar ke hain - kashayasahit aur kashayaraahit. Krodhaadi kashay kahlaate hain. Kashay ke samaan hone se kashay kahlaata hai. Upmaaroop arth kya hai? Jis prakaar nayagraodhaadi kashay śleşh ka kaaran hai usi prakaar aatma ka krodhaadi roop kashay bhi karmon ke śleşh ka kaaran hai isliye kashay ke samaan yah kashay hai aisa kahte hain. Jis ke kashay hai vah sakashaya jeev hai aur jis ke kashay nahin hai vah akashaya jeev hai. Yahaan in dono padon ka pahle 'sakashayaścākashayashcheti sakashayaakashayo' is prakaar dvandva samaas karke anantar svaamitva dikhlaane ke liye ṣaṣṭhī ka dvivacan diya hai. Sampraayah sansaar ka paryayaavachi hai. Jo karma sansaar ka prayojaka hai vah saampraayik karma hai. Iiryaa ki vyutpatti 'iiranam' hogi. Yog ka arth gati hai. Jo karma iske dwara praapt hota hai vah iiryaapatha karma hai. Yahaan in dono padon ka pahle ‘saampraayikam ca iiryaapatham ca saampraayikeiryaapathe' is prakaar dvandva samaas karke tadanantar sambandh dikhlaane ke liye ṣaṣṭhī ka dvivacan diya hai. Sakashaya ke saath saampraayik shabd ka aur akashaya ke saath iiryaapatha shabd ka yathaakram sambandh hai. Jis se yah arth hua ki mithyaadṛṣṭi aadi kashayasahit jeev ke saampraayik karma ka aasrav hota hai. Tatha upashanta kashay aadi kashay rahit jeev ke iiryaapatha karma ka aasrav hota hai.
8617. Aadi mein kahe gaye aasrav ke bhed dikhlaane ke liye aage ka sutra kahte hain
Poorva ke arthāt saampraayik karmaasrav ke indriya, kashay, avrat aur kriyaaroop bhev hain jo kramese paanch, chaar, paanch aur pacchīs hain ||5||
8618. Yahaan indriya aadi ka paanch aadi ke saath kramese sambandh jaanna chahiye. Yatha 1. –dṛṣṭaḥ saamp- mu.


 .

Page #367:
---------------------------
## Chapter Six

[247-615 to 618]

There are five senses, four *kṣayās*, five *avratas*, and twenty-five *kriyās*. 

The five senses, beginning with touch, have already been mentioned. The four *kṣayās* are anger, etc. The five *avratas*, beginning with *prāṇa-vyaparopaṇa*, will be discussed later. 

Here we describe the twenty-five *kriyās*:

* **Samyaktvakriyā:** Actions that increase *samyaktvam*, such as worshipping the *caitya*, the guru, and the scriptures.
* **Mithyātvakriyā:** Actions that lead to *mithyātvam*, such as praising other deities, etc.
* **Prayogakriyā:** Actions involving movement, such as walking, coming, going, etc., performed by the body, etc.
* **Samādāna-kriyā:** The action of a restrained being facing *aviratī* (non-restraint).
* **Īryāpathakriyā:** Actions that are the cause of *īryāpatha* (wrong conduct).

These are five *kriyās*.

* **Prādoṣikī-kriyā:** Actions arising from anger.
* **Kāyikī-kriyā:** Actions of a corrupted being striving for progress.
* **Ādhikāraṇikī-kriyā:** Actions involving the acquisition of instruments of violence.
* **Pārītāpikī-kriyā:** Actions that cause suffering.
* **Prāṇātipātikī-kriyā:** Actions that cause the separation of life, senses, strength, and breath.

These are five *kriyās*.

* **Darśanakriyā:** The action of a deluded being, due to being influenced by *rāga*, etc., intending to see something beautiful.
* **Sparśanakriyā:** The action of touching a conscious object, due to delusion.
* **Prātyayikī-kriyā:** Actions that create new *adhikāras* (rights).
* **Samanupātakriyā:** The action of expelling internal impurities in the place where women, men, and animals come and go, sit and stand.
* **Anābhōgakriyā:** The action of placing the body, etc., on unswept and unobserved ground.

These are five *kriyās*.

* **Svahastakriyā:** The action of doing oneself what others would do.
* **Nisarga-kriyā:** The action of giving consent to specific actions, such as taking *pāpa* (sin), *dāna* (donation), etc.
* **Vidāraṇakriyā:** The action of revealing the wrongdoings of others.
* **Ājñāvyāpādikī-kriyā:** The action of misrepresenting the instructions of the scriptures, due to the arising of *cāritramoha* (delusion about conduct), when one is unable to perform the necessary actions as instructed.
* **Anākāṅkṣakriyā:** The action of disrespecting the duties prescribed by the scriptures, due to cunningness and laziness.

These are five *kriyās*.

[Footnotes:]

1. *Śatikriyā* (hundred actions) - M.
2. The action of the cause - Di. 1, Di. 2, Ā.
3. Action - Sattva, suffering, etc. - Tā., Nā., Mu.
4. Strength, life, etc. - Mu.
5. *Śyakadi* (cunningness, etc.) - Mu.
6. Expelling, etc. - Ā., Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #368:
---------------------------
## 248] Sarvarthasiddhi
[6168 619 The action of being enthusiastic about an action initiated by another is called Prarabdha Kriya. The action performed for the sake of destroying attachment is called Parigrahika Kriya.
Deception in the matters of knowledge, perception, etc. is called Maya Kriya. To strengthen someone with the means of wrong perception, by praising them, saying "You are doing well", is called Mithyadarshan Kriya. The action of not rejecting the results of the karmas that destroy restraint, is called Apratyakhyana Kriya. These are the five Kriyas. These, when combined, become twenty-five Kriyas. These, along with the senses, etc., become the doors of the Saampraayika Karma through Asrava, due to the difference and non-difference of cause and effect.
8619. Here it is said, that since the three Yogas are the work of all souls, they are common to all beings in the world, therefore, there should be uniformity in the experience of the fruits of bondage. To this, it is said, "This is not so." Because, even though the Yogas are present in every soul, there are infinite variations in the results of the souls, therefore, the experience of the fruits of bondage must be considered as having a special nature. Question: How? Answer: This is explained in the next Sutra.
The special nature of Asrava is due to the difference in the intensity, mildness, knowledge, ignorance, object, and power. ||6||
8620: The result that arises due to the stimulation of external and internal causes is called Teebhra Bhava. The opposite of this is called Manda Bhava. To act knowing that "This being should be killed by me" is called Jnata Bhava. To act without knowing, due to intoxication or negligence, is called Ajnata Bhava. The object in which things are placed is called Adhikarana. Here, Adhikarana refers to the substance. The special power of the substance is called Veerya. The word Bhava should be combined with all the words, such as Teebhra Bhava, Manda Bhava, etc. Due to all these reasons, there is a special nature in Asrava, because the difference in the cause leads to the difference in the effect. 1. Darshanakaran- Ta., Na., Mu. 2.  Ranasya Tato Mu. 3. Praani Hanta- Mu., Ta., Na. 4. Va Kriya  M.

Page #369:
---------------------------
[ -618 § 624]
[ 249
§ 621. It is said, "The object of the action is liberated." Its nature is unknown, therefore it should be explained. There, for the purpose of knowing the nature of the object of the action through the exposition of its divisions, it is said:
Chapter Six
The object of the action is the living and the non-living. || 7 ||
§ 622. The living and the non-living have been described before. Why is there a repetition of their description? The repetition is for the purpose of indicating the specific object of the action. It is to be understood that the living and the non-living are the object of the action. What is it? It is the state of being an instrument of violence, etc. It may be said that since the original substances are two, the dual number "jivajiva" is justified in the sutra. This is not so, because the synonyms are considered to be the object of the action. The substance with any one synonym is the object of the action, not the substance alone, therefore the plural number is used in the sutra. The living and the non-living are the object of the action of what? Of the inflow. The connection with the inflow is established according to the meaning.
§ 623. There, for the purpose of understanding the divisions of the object of the action of the living, it is said:
The first object of the action of the living is of three kinds due to the divisions of commencement, preparation, and beginning, of three kinds due to the divisions of yogas, of three kinds due to the divisions of done, caused, and permitted, and of four kinds due to the divisions of passions, making a total of one hundred and eight kinds when combined together. || 8 ||
§ 624. The effort of a careless living being in the act of killing, etc., is commencement. The gathering of the means is preparation. The beginning of the act is beginning. The meaning of the word "yoga" has been explained before. The word "done" is used in the sutra to indicate the independence of the agent. The word "caused" indicates dependence on another's action. The word "permitted" is used to show the mental consequence of the instigator. The characteristics described

Page #370:
---------------------------
## 250]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[619 § 625

**Kashaya** are anger, etc. The meaning is distinguished from the inner meaning, this is the **vishesha**. It is connected to each one - **samarambha vishesha**, **samarambha vishesha**, etc. The first **jivaadhikaran** is distinguished by this **vishesha**, the remaining part of the sentence is "**bhidyate**". These four **sujanta** words, "three" etc., are connected in order - **samarambha**, **samarambha**, and **arambha** are three, **yoga** are three, **krita**, **karita**, and **anumata** are three, and **kashaya** are four. The repetition of their counting is indicated by the **sucha** suffix. "**Ekasha**" is an indication of **vipsa**. The meaning is that the three etc. distinctions should be applied to each one. For example, **krodhakrita kayasamrambha**, **manakrita kayasamrambha**, **mayakrita kayasamrambha**, **lobhakrita kayasamrambha**, **krodhakaritakayasamrambha**, **manakari takayasamrambha**, **mayakari takayasamrambha**, **lobhakaritakayasamrambha**, **krodhanumatakayasamrambha**, **mananumatakayasamrambha**, **mayanumatakayasamrambha**, **lobhanumatakayasamrambha**. In this way, **kayasamrambha** is of twelve types. Similarly, **vakyayoga** and **manoyoga** are also of twelve types. These are all combined, making thirty-six distinctions. Similarly, **samarambha** and **arambha** also have thirty-six distinctions each. These are all combined, making 108 distinctions of **jivaadhikaran**. The word "**cha**" is used to include the distinctions of **anantaanubandhi**, **apratyakhyana**, **pratyakhyana**, and **sanjwalana** types of **kashaya**. 8625. To understand the distinctions of the other **ajivaadhikaran**, the next sutra says - **para**, i.e. **ajivaadhikaran** is of two, four, two, and three distinctions respectively, in the form of **nirvartana**, **nikshepa**, **samyoga**, and **nisarga**. ||9||
8626. **Nirvartana** means **nishpadana**, i.e. creation. **Nikshepa** means **sthapana**, i.e. placing. **Samyoga** means **mishrikrita**, i.e. mixed. **Nisarga** means **pravartan**, i.e. initiation. These are connected in order with two etc. - 
The word "**karita**" is used to show the expectation of the **prayogaka**. Similarly, the word "**anumata**" is used to show the mental result of the **prayojaka**. The characteristics of **kashaya** like anger, etc. have been mentioned. That which makes one meaning distinct from another is **vishesha**. It should be connected with each word, such as **samarambha vishesha**, **samarambha vishesha**, etc. Here, "**bhidyate**" is the remaining part of the sentence, which means that the first **jivaadhikaran** is distinguished by these characteristics. These four **sucha**-suffixed words, "three" etc., are connected in order - **samarambha**, **samarambha**, and **arambha** are three, **yoga** are three, **krita**, **karita**, and **anumata** are three, and **kashaya** are four. The repetition of their counting is indicated by the **sucha** suffix. "**Ekasha**" is an indication of **vipsa**. The meaning is that the three etc. distinctions should be applied to each one. For example, **krodhakrita kayasamrambha**, **manakrita kayasamrambha**, **mayakrita kayasamrambha**, **lobhakrita kayasamrambha**, **krodhakaritakayasamrambha**, **manakari takayasamrambha**, **mayakari takayasamrambha**, **lobhakaritakayasamrambha**, **krodhanumatakayasamrambha**, **mananumatakayasamrambha**, **mayanumatakayasamrambha**, **lobhanumatakayasamrambha**. In this way, **kayasamrambha** is of twelve types. Similarly, **vakyayoga** and **manoyoga** are also of twelve types. These are all combined, making thirty-six distinctions. Similarly, **samarambha** and **arambha** also have thirty-six distinctions each. These are all combined, making 108 distinctions of **jivaadhikaran**. The word "**cha**" is used to include the distinctions of **anantaanubandhi**, **apratyakhyana**, **pratyakhyana**, and **sanjwalana** types of **kashaya**. 8625. To understand the distinctions of the other **ajivaadhikaran**, the next sutra says - **para**, i.e. **ajivaadhikaran** is of two, four, two, and three distinctions respectively, in the form of **nirvartana**, **nikshepa**, **samyoga**, and **nisarga**. ||9||
8626. **Nirvartana** means **nishpadana**, i.e. creation. **Nikshepa** means **sthapana**, i.e. placing. **Samyoga** means **mishrikrita**, i.e. mixed. **Nisarga** means **pravartan**, i.e. initiation. These are connected in order with two etc. - 
1. **Tryadibhedan a., di. 1, di. 21** 2. **Aite pindi - mu.** | 3. **Jivasyaadhi mu.**

Page #371:
---------------------------
## Chapter Six

There are six types of *nirvartana*, four types of *nikshepa*, two types of *samyoga*, and three types of *nisarga*. These are the categories of the non-living (*ajiva*).

**Doubt:** The word "other" (*para*) in the sutra is meaningless, because the previous sutra mentioned "first" (*adya*), which implies that this sutra refers to the remaining categories.

**Resolution:** The word "other" (*para*) has a different meaning here. It indicates that *nirvartana* etc. are different from *sanrambha* etc. Otherwise, if *nirvartana* etc. were considered as the results of the soul (*atma*), then they would be considered as categories of the living (*jiva*).

There are two types of *nirvartana*: *mula-guna-nirvartana* and *uttar-guna-nirvartana*. *Mula-guna-nirvartana* has five categories: body, speech, mind, *prana*, and *apana*. *Uttar-guna-nirvartana* includes activities like carpentry, writing, and painting.

There are four types of *nikshepa*: *apratyavekshit-nikshepa*, *dushpramsht-nikshepa*, *sahasa-nikshepa*, and *anabhoga-nikshepa*.

There are two types of *samyoga*: *bhakta-pana-samyoga* and *upakarana-samyoga*.

There are three types of *nisarga*: *kaya-nisarga*, *vacana-nisarga*, and *mana-nisarga*.

## Explanation of the Sutra

The previous sutras discussed the general categories of *karma-asrava*. Now, we will discuss the specific categories of *karma-asrava*. To understand the categories of *asrava* for *jnana-avaran* and *darshan-avaran*, the following sutra is presented:

**Sutra 10:** *Tattv-jnana* is the means to liberation. When someone praises *tattv-jnana* but does not speak about it, it is called *pradosha*. When someone denies knowledge or says "I don't know" due to some reason, it is called *nihnava*. When someone has acquired knowledge but does not share it due to jealousy, it is called *matsaraya*. When someone obstructs the path of knowledge, it is called *antaraya*. When someone enjoys the fruits of knowledge without sharing it, it is called *asadan*. When someone destroys the knowledge of others, it is called *upaghata*. These are the *asravas* for *jnana-avaran* and *darshan-avaran*.

## Explanation of the Sutra

* **Pradosha:** When someone praises *tattv-jnana* but does not speak about it, it is called *pradosha*. This is because they are secretly jealous of others who have knowledge.
* **Nihnava:** When someone denies knowledge or says "I don't know" due to some reason, it is called *nihnava*. This is because they are trying to hide their ignorance.
* **Matsarya:** When someone has acquired knowledge but does not share it due to jealousy, it is called *matsaraya*. This is because they are afraid that others will surpass them.
* **Antaraya:** When someone obstructs the path of knowledge, it is called *antaraya*. This is because they are trying to prevent others from achieving liberation.
* **Asadan:** When someone enjoys the fruits of knowledge without sharing it, it is called *asadan*. This is because they are selfish and only care about their own benefit.
* **Upaghata:** When someone destroys the knowledge of others, it is called *upaghata*. This is because they are trying to prevent others from achieving liberation.

These six *asravas* are the main obstacles to achieving liberation. They prevent us from acquiring knowledge and developing our spiritual understanding. By overcoming these *asravas*, we can progress on the path to liberation.

Page #372:
---------------------------
## 252] Sarvarthasiddhi
[61118 629th chapter, the rejection of the knowledge of the other's illumination is Asadanam. The corruption of praiseworthy knowledge is Upadhatah. If it is said that this is Asadanam? Then, the acceptance of the virtues of true knowledge, such as humility and giving, is Asadanam. Upadhatah is the intention to destroy knowledge, considering knowledge as ignorance. This is the difference between the two. The word 'Tat' refers to both knowledge and vision. How can the reference of 'Tat' be made to the unmentioned and uncreated? It is by question. When asked what is the Asrava of knowledge and vision, the word 'Tat' refers to knowledge and vision in relation to that question. By this, the defects like Pradosha etc. should be applied to knowledge, vision, and their means, because they are the cause of them. These Pradosha etc. are the causes of Asrava of knowledge and vision. The effect of one cause is seen in many ways, therefore, even with the same Pradosha etc., the Asrava of both knowledge and vision is established. Or, the Asrava is different due to the difference in the subject matter. Pradosha etc. related to knowledge are the Asrava of knowledge, and Pradosha etc. related to vision are the Asrava of vision.
8629. Just as the Asrava of these two Karmas is of many types, so also -
Dukha, Shoka, Tapa, Akrandan, Vadh, and Paridevana, which are present in oneself, in others, or in both, are the Asrava of Asatavedaniya Karma. ||1||
8630. The result of the soul in the form of suffering is Dukha. The special kind of dejection that arises from the breaking of the relationship with the benefactor is Shoka. The intense anguish of the mind caused by the occasion of reproach etc. is Tapa. The loud crying expressed by tears, excessive lamentation etc. arising from regret is Akrandan. The destruction of life, sense organs, strength, and breath is Vadh. The dependence on the result of the affliction is Paridevana. The reason why it is not given is envy. The destruction of knowledge is an obstacle. The prohibition of another's illumination by body or speech is Asadanam. The corruption of praiseworthy knowledge is Upadhatah. Doubt - The characteristic of Upadhatah that has been described makes it appear as Asadanam? Solution - Not being humble to praiseworthy knowledge, not praising its goodness etc. is Asadanam. But, considering knowledge as ignorance and intending to destroy knowledge is Upadhatah. Thus, there is a difference between the two. The word 'Tat' in the verse is used to refer to knowledge and vision. Doubt - Knowledge and vision are uncreated, and they are not even mentioned, then how can their knowledge be obtained through the word 'Tat' here? Solution - In relation to the question, i.e., when asked what is the Asrava of knowledge and vision, the word 'Tat' refers to knowledge and vision. This implies that defects like Pradosha etc. should be planned for those who have knowledge and vision, and for their means, because they are caused by them. These Pradosha etc. are the causes of Asrava of knowledge and vision Karma. The effect of one cause is seen in many ways, therefore, even with the same Pradosha etc., the Asrava of both knowledge and vision is established. Or, the Asrava is different due to the difference in the subject matter. Pradosha etc. related to knowledge are the Asrava of knowledge, and Pradosha etc. related to vision are the Asrava of vision.
8629. Just as the Asrava of these two Karmas is of many types, so also -
Dukha, Shoka, Tapa, Akrandan, Vadh, and Paridevana, which are present in oneself, in others, or in both, are the Asrava of Asatavedaniya Karma. ||1||
8630. The result of the soul in the form of suffering is Dukha. The special kind of dejection that arises from the breaking of the relationship with the benefactor is Shoka. The intense anguish of the mind caused by the occasion of reproach etc. is Tapa. The loud crying expressed by tears, excessive lamentation etc. arising from regret is Akrandan. The destruction of life, sense organs, strength, and breath is Vadh. The dependence on the result of the affliction is Paridevana. 1. -lambanam sva-para- A., Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #373:
---------------------------
-61118 630] - Chapter Six
[253  Weeping and lamenting with abundant compassion, remembering and praising the qualities, and desiring the welfare of oneself and others.  Is it not enough to simply accept that sorrow and the like are a particular type of suffering?  It is true, but by explaining some specific differences, the nature of suffering is revealed.  Just as when we say "cow," we do not know the specific differences, so we use the terms "horned," "headless," "black," and "white" to explain them, similarly, when we say "suffering," we do not know the countless differences in the world that arise from the flow of suffering.  Therefore, by pointing out some specific differences, we understand those specific differences.  These sorrows and the like are located within oneself, in others, or in both, due to the influence of anger and the like.  All of these should be known as the causes of the flow of the non-virtuous and the knowable.  Here it is asked: If sorrow and the like, located within oneself, in others, or in both, are the causes of the flow of the non-virtuous and the knowable, why do those who follow the path of the Arhat believe in and teach others about hair-plucking, fasting, and sun-bathing, which are causes of suffering?  This is not a fault, because it is specifically stated that the sorrows and the like that arise from the influence of anger and the like within oneself are the causes of the flow of the non-virtuous and the knowable.  Just as a physician, who is extremely compassionate, skillful, and restrained, does not incur the bondage of sin when he causes pain to a patient by lancing a boil, because it is only an external cause, similarly, a monk who is distressed by the great suffering of the world, and whose mind is focused on the means to eliminate it, does not incur the bondage of sin when he engages in actions prescribed by the scriptures, because there are no karmic consequences.  It is said:
"Neither suffering nor happiness is seen in the means of treatment.  In treatment, however, there may be suffering or happiness."
1.  Jatyantara-vidha  Mu.  2.  Krodhavesha- Mu.

Page #374:
---------------------------
## 254]
In the attainment of all good,
Neither suffering nor happiness is the cause of liberation, but a means to it.
In the path of liberation, however, there may be suffering or happiness.

8 631. The causes of the non-cognizable karmas have been stated. Now, the causes of the cognizable karmas are to be stated. They are:
**Bhuta-Anukampa (compassion for all beings), Vrati-Anukampa (compassion for those who observe vows), Dana (charity), Saraga-Samayamadi-Yoga (the yoga of restraint with attachment), Kshanti (forbearance), and Saucha (purity).**

8 632. Those who are in various states of existence due to the ripening of karmas are called **Bhuta** (beings). This is a synonym for **pranin** (living beings). The vows like ahimsa (non-violence) etc. will be described later. Those who observe these vows are called **Vrati**. They are of two types: those who have renounced the household life and are restrained, and those who are householders and are restrained.
**Anukampa** is the feeling of compassion for others, arising from a heart filled with kindness, considering their suffering as one's own. **Bhuta-Anukampa** is compassion for all beings, and **Vrati-Anukampa** is compassion for those who observe vows. **Dana** is the giving of one's possessions with the intention of benefiting others. **Saraga** is one who is eager to renounce the causes of worldly existence, but whose attachments have not yet been eradicated. **Samayama** is the restraint from evil actions in relation to the senses and objects. **Saraga-Samayama** is the restraint with attachment. The word **"adi"** (and so on) includes **Samayama-Asamayama** (restraint and non-restraint), **Akamanirjara** (absence of desire), **Balatapas** (minor austerities), and **Anurodha** (following the path). **Yoga** is synonymous with **Samadhi** (concentration) and **Samyak-Pranidhana** (right intention). The **Yoga** of **Bhuta-Anukampa, Vrati-Anukampa, Dana, and Saraga-Samayamadi** is the practice of these with full attention. **Kshanti** is the eradication of anger and other negative emotions. **Saucha** is the abandonment of all forms of greed. The word **"iti"** (thus) indicates the types. What are these types? They are: **Arhat-Puja-Karana-Tatparata** (eagerness to worship the Arhats), **Balavruddh-Tapasvi-Vaiyavrittya-Avaya** (the conduct of children, elders, ascetics, and those who are indifferent).

Page #375:
---------------------------
## Chapter Six

[255]

Although the term 'Bhutas' includes 'Vratis', the term 'Vratis' is specifically mentioned in the sutra to emphasize the importance of compassion towards them. These are all the Asravas of the Saataavedaniya.

8633. Now, it is time to discuss the Asravas of the Mohaniya. First, we will discuss the Asravas of the Darshan Mohaniya. The sutra says:

The Avर्णवाद of the Kevali, Shruta, Sangh, Dharma, and Deva is the Asrava of the Darshan Mohaniya Karma.

8634. Those whose knowledge is free from Avaranas are called Kevalis. The Shruta is the compilation of scriptures written by the Ganadharas, who have extraordinary intellect and remember the teachings of the Kevalis. The Sangh is the community of Shramanas who are adorned with the three jewels. The Dharma is the non-violence taught in the Agamas revealed by the omniscient. The Devas are of four types, as mentioned earlier. Avर्णवाद is the act of attributing faults to those who are virtuous and great. Avर्णवाद directed towards the Kevalis, Shruta, Sangh, Dharma, and Devas is the cause of the Asrava of the Darshan Mohaniya. For example, saying that the Kevalis live by begging is Avर्णवाद towards the Kevalis. Saying that the scriptures allow meat-eating is Avर्णवाद towards the Shruta. Saying that the Sangh are Shudras and impure is Avर्णवाद towards the Sangh. Saying that the Dharma taught by the Jinas is devoid of essence and those who follow it will become Asuras is Avर्णवाद towards the Dharma. Saying that the Devas consume alcohol and meat is Avर्णवाद towards the Devas.

8635. Now, the sutra discusses the Asravas of the second type of Mohaniya, the Charitra Mohaniya:

The intense self-transformation caused by the arising of Kshayas is the Asrava of the Charitra Mohaniya.

8636. The Kshayas have been discussed earlier. Udya means ripening. The intense self-transformation caused by the ripening of the Kshayas is the Asrava of the Charitra Mohaniya.

Page #376:
---------------------------
256]
[6115 § 637
The flow of *āsrava* should be known.  The *āsrava* of *kṣayavedaniya* are: generating *kṣaya* in oneself and others, polluting the conduct of ascetics, holding *linga* (garments) and vows that generate *saṃkleśa*, etc. The *āsrava* of *hāsyavedaniya* are: mocking the true Dharma, making fun of the poor, laughing and joking that increases *kuṭsita rāga*, being talkative and prone to laughter, etc. The *āsrava* of *rativedaniya* are: being engaged in various kinds of play, not being interested in observing vows and good conduct, etc. The *āsrava* of *arativedaniya* are: generating *arati* in others, destroying *rati*, engaging in sinful conduct, associating with sinners, etc. The *āsrava* of *śokavedaniya* are: being sorrowful oneself, increasing the sorrow of others, and praising such people, etc. The *āsrava* of *bhayavedaniya* are: generating fear in others as a result of one's own fear, etc. The *āsrava* of *jugupsavedaniya* are: feeling disgust towards good actions and good conduct, being interested in criticizing, etc. The *āsrava* of *strīvedaniya* are: being habitually dishonest, being overly suspicious, looking for faults in others, and having increased *rāga*, etc. The *āsrava* of *pumvedaniya* are: having little anger, not being envious, being content with one's own wife, etc. The *āsrava* of *napumsakavedaniya* are: generating *kṣaya* in abundance, destroying the subtle senses, and raping another's wife, etc.

8637. The different types of *āsrava* of *mohaniya* have been described. Now, the *āsrava* that are the cause of *āyuṣkarma* will be described.  First, to show the cause of the *āyu* that bears fruit for a fixed period, the following *sūtra* is said:

Having many beginnings and many attachments is the *āsrava* of the *nāraka* *āyu*. ||15||

8638. Beginning is the action that causes harm to living beings. Attachment is the thought, "This is mine." Beginnings and attachments are called "beginnings and attachments." One who has many beginnings and many attachments is called "one who has many beginnings and many attachments." His state is called "having many beginnings and many attachments." Violence, etc. 1. *nātihāsa* *bahu*  *mu*. 2.  *tpādanam paraśokāviṣkaraṇam śoka*  *ta*. । 3.  *rtvam pararandhrāpe* - *mu*. ।  *rtvam randhrāpe* - *ā*. । 4.   *nāskandā*  *mu*. 5. *nirdiṣṭasyāyuṣaḥ kāraṇa* - *mu*. 1

Page #377:
---------------------------
-6118 8 644] Chapter Six
1257 The cause of hellish life is the excessive beginning and attachment. The continuous performance of cruel deeds like violence, greed, excessive attachment to worldly objects, black aura, fierce meditation, and death-time characteristics are the causes of hellish life. 8639. It has been said that the cause of hellish life is excessive beginning and attachment. Now, the cause of animal life should be explained. Therefore, the next sutra says:
Maya is the cause of animal life. ||16||
8640. Maya, which arises from the special karma of character-delusion, is the crookedness of the soul. It is also known as degradation. It is the cause of animal life. Its detailed explanation is: spreading false doctrines mixed with true ones, leading a life devoid of good conduct, being fond of excessive arguments, and having a blue or pigeon-colored aura, anxious meditation, and death-time characteristics are the causes of animal life.
8641. The cause of animal life has been explained. Now, the cause of human life should be explained. Therefore, the next sutra says:
Little beginning and little attachment are the causes of human life. ||17||
8642. The cause of hellish life has been explained. The opposite of that is the cause of human life. This is the summary of this sutra. Its detailed explanation is: having a gentle nature, being naturally virtuous, behaving with good qualities, having few passions, and not having any distress at the time of death are the causes of human life.
8643. Is this the only cause of human life, or are there others? Therefore, the next sutra says:
Gentleness of nature is also the cause of human life. ||18||
8644. Gentleness is the quality of being soft. Gentleness of nature is being gentle by nature. This means that it is not dependent on any instruction.

Page #378:
---------------------------
## 258] Sarvarthasiddhau

[61198645 This is also an asrava of the human lifespan. Why is this made a separate sutra? The answer is that this is to show that even the lifespan of the gods has this asrava. 8645. Is this the only second asrava of the human lifespan? No, it is said that 
Being devoid of good conduct and vows is an asrava for all lifespans. ||19|| 8646. The word 'cha' signifies the collection of the authorized asravas. This means that having a small beginning and small possessions, as well as being devoid of good conduct and vows, are all asravas for all lifespans. The nature of good conduct and vows will be explained later. The state of being devoid of these is an asrava for all lifespans. This is the meaning of this sutra. The word 'sarvesham' is used in the sutra to show that this is an asrava for all lifespans. Question: Is being devoid of good conduct and vows also an asrava for the lifespan of the gods? Answer: Yes, it is an asrava for the lifespan of the gods, compared to the beings of the bhogabhumi. 
8647. Now, regarding what is the asrava of the fourth lifespan, the next sutra says: Saraga-samyama, samyama-asamyama, akamanirjara, and balatapa are the asravas of the gods. ||20||
8648. Saraga-samyama and samyama-asamyama have been explained before. Akamanirjara is the depletion caused by the suppression of hunger, thirst, sexual desire, etc., which is caused by the restraint of the charaka. Balatapa is the observance of vows with a lot of bodily exertion, which is not useful for the path of liberation due to wrong belief. These are all to be known as the causes of asrava for the lifespan of the gods.

Page #379:
---------------------------
## Chapter Six

**8649.** Is this the only *āsrava* of the *devāyuka*? Or is there more? The next *sūtra* explains:
**Samyaktva** is also an *āsrava* of the *devāyuka*. ||21||

**8650.** Doubt: Why? Resolution: Because of the separate *sūtra*. Doubt: If this is the case, then the rule stated in the previous *sūtra* applies generally, and it follows that *sarāga-samyama* and *samyama-asamyama* are also *āsrava* of the *bhavanavāsī* etc. *āyu*. Resolution: This is not a fault; because in the absence of *samyaktva*, *sarāga-samyama* and *samyama-asamyama* do not exist, therefore both of them are included here. In other words, these are also *āsrava* of the *saudharmā* etc. *devāyu*, because they only exist when *samyaktva* is present.

**8651.** After *āyu*, the mention of *nāma* *āsrava* is in order. To explain the *āsrava* of the *aśubha* *nāma*, the next *sūtra* says:
**Yoga-vakratā** and **visamvādana** are the *āsrava* of the *aśubha* *nāma* *karma*. ||22||

**8652.** Three types of *yoga* have been explained earlier. Its crookedness is *yoga-vakratā*. To act otherwise is *visamvādana*. Doubt: There is no difference in meaning here, because *yoga-vakratā* and acting otherwise are the same thing? Resolution: This is true, but *yoga-vakratā* is said to be internal, while *visamvādana* is external. One who is engaged in actions that are conducive to *samyag-udaya* and *niḥśreyasa*, to hinder him by means of contrary thoughts, speech, and body is *visamvādana*. For example, "Don't do this, do that." Thus, these two are not the same, but different. Both of these should be known as the cause of the *āsrava* of the *aśubha* *nāma* *karma*. The word "and" in the *sūtra* includes *mithyādarśana*, *paiśunya*, *asthira-citta-tā*, *kūṭa-māna-tula-karaṇa*, *paranindā*, *ātma-praśamsā*, etc.

Page #380:
---------------------------
Day
260] Sarvarthasiddhi
[61238-653 $ 653. Now, the aphorism explains what are the *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma*.
The opposite of that, i.e., the *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma* are simplicity and non-discord. ||23||
8654. Simplicity of body, speech, and mind, and non-discord are the opposite of that. By the word 'and', one should understand the opposite of those things which are combined together. For example, seeing the *dharmic* persons and places, showing respect and honour, maintaining harmony, *upanayana*, fear of the world, and abandoning carelessness, etc. These are the causes of the *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma*.
8655. Question: Are these the only *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma*, or are there any other special features? Answer: This *tīrthankara* *nāmakarma* is infinite, unparalleled in its effects, the cause of inconceivable special *vibhūti*, and the conqueror of the three worlds. Therefore, there are special features in its *āsrava*. If this is so, then what are its *āsrava*? Therefore, starting from this aphorism,
Purity of vision, being endowed with humility, non-transgression in conduct and vows, constant use of knowledge, constant *saṁvega*, renunciation according to one's capacity, austerity according to one's capacity, *sādhu-samādhi*, *vaiyāvṛtti*, devotion to *arihant*, devotion to *ācārya*, devotion to *bahuśruta*, love of *pravacana*, not abandoning essential duties, influencing the path of liberation, and love of *pravacana* are the *āsrava* of *tīrthankara* *nāmakarma*. ||24||
$ 656. (1) The *nirgrantha* nature of the path of liberation, as taught by the *jinas* (victorious ones), the *bhagavats* (divine ones), the *arihants* (supreme beings), is to have a liking for it, and purity of vision. Its special characteristics have been mentioned earlier. It has eight parts: being free from doubt, being free from desire, being free from uncertainty, having an unconfused vision, *upabṛhaṇa*, *sthitikaraṇa*, *vātsalya*, and *prabhāvana*. (2) Respect, honour, and humility towards *samyagjñāna*, etc., the path of liberation, and their means, such as the guru, etc., according to one's capacity, being endowed with humility. Non-transgression in the vows of non-violence, etc., and their observance, etc. 
$ 653. Now, the aphorism explains what are the *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma*.
The opposite of that, i.e., the *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma* are simplicity and non-discord. ||23||
8654. Simplicity of body, speech, and mind, and non-discord are the opposite of that. By the word 'and', one should understand the opposite of those things which are combined together. For example, seeing the *dharmic* persons and places, showing respect and honour, maintaining harmony, *upanayana*, fear of the world, and abandoning carelessness, etc. These are the causes of the *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma*.
8655. Question: Are these the only *āsrava* of *śubhanāmakarma*, or are there any other special features? Answer: This *tīrthankara* *nāmakarma* is infinite, unparalleled in its effects, the cause of inconceivable special *vibhūti*, and the conqueror of the three worlds. Therefore, there are special features in its *āsrava*. If this is so, then what are its *āsrava*? Therefore, starting from this aphorism,
Purity of vision, being endowed with humility, non-transgression in conduct and vows, constant use of knowledge, constant *saṁvega*, renunciation according to one's capacity, austerity according to one's capacity, *sādhu-samādhi*, *vaiyāvṛtti*, devotion to *arihant*, devotion to *ācārya*, devotion to *bahuśruta*, love of *pravacana*, not abandoning essential duties, influencing the path of liberation, and love of *pravacana* are the *āsrava* of *tīrthankara* *nāmakarma*. ||24||
$ 656. (1) The *nirgrantha* nature of the path of liberation, as taught by the *jinas* (victorious ones), the *bhagavats* (divine ones), the *arihants* (supreme beings), is to have a liking for it, and purity of vision. Its special characteristics have been mentioned earlier. It has eight parts: being free from doubt, being free from desire, being free from uncertainty, having an unconfused vision, *upabṛhaṇa*, *sthitikaraṇa*, *vātsalya*, and *prabhāvana*. (2) Respect, honour, and humility towards *samyagjñāna*, etc., the path of liberation, and their means, such as the guru, etc., according to one's capacity, being endowed with humility. Non-transgression in the vows of non-violence, etc., and their observance, etc.

Page #381:
---------------------------
-6125 §.657]
Chapter Six
[261
A flawless conduct in the virtues of non-anger, etc., is the non-deviation from the vow of virtue. Constant application of right knowledge in the true nature of the soul, etc., is the continuous use of knowledge. Constant fear of the suffering of the world is the emotion. Renunciation is charity. It is of three types: food charity, fearlessness charity, and knowledge charity. It is called renunciation when it is used according to the rules and to the best of one's ability. Austerity is the bodily hardship that is not hidden and is not against the path. Just as a fire that has arisen in a storehouse is extinguished because it is very beneficial, so also, when an obstacle arises for a monk who is rich in vows and virtues, the maintenance of his austerity is called samadhi. The removal of the suffering of a virtuous person by a flawless method is called vaiyaavrutya. Affection with purity of emotions towards Arhats, Acharyas, Bahushruta, and sermons is called Arhat devotion, Acharya devotion, Bahushruta devotion, and sermon devotion. Performing the six essential actions in due time is called essential performance. The illumination of religion through knowledge, austerity, charity, and Jina worship is called path propagation. Affection for fellow religionists, like a cow for her calf, is called love for sermons. These are the sixteen causes. If they are considered separately, they are the causes of the asava of the Tirthankara name karma. If they are considered collectively, they are also the causes of the asava of the Tirthankara name karma.
§ 657. After mentioning the asavas of the name karma, it is now time to mention the asavas of the gotra karma. In that too, the asavas of the low gotra are mentioned first. The next sutra says: "Slandering others, praising oneself, covering up good qualities, and promoting bad qualities are the asavas of the low gotra." || 2500
1. -Acharya Bahu- Mu. 2. Tapa Jina - Mu.

Page #382:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**262]**

**[6126 6 6588658.]** The desire to expose the truth or falsehood or fault is called **ninda** (blame). The intention to reveal the qualities is called **prashansa** (praise). The connection with the words **para** (other) and **atma** (self) is in this order: **paraninda** (blame of others) and **atmaprashansa** (self-praise). When there are obstacles, the non-manifestation of the action due to the non-revealing attitude is called **ucchadana** (concealment). When there are no obstacles, the manifestation of the action due to the revealing attitude is called **udbhavana** (manifestation). Here also, the connection is in this order: **sadgunocchadana** (concealment of good qualities) and **asadgunodbhavana** (manifestation of bad qualities). These are the causes of **asrava** (influx) for the **nicha** (lower) **gotra** (lineage). 

**[8659.]** Now, the cause of **asrava** for the **ucca** (higher) **gotra** is explained in the following sutra:

**Tadvīparyayo nīcaivṛttyanutseko coत्तरस्य ॥26॥**

**[8660.]** The word "**tat**" refers to the **asrava** of the **nicha** **gotra** mentioned earlier. The opposite of the attitude is called **vṛtti** **vīparyaya** (opposite attitude). The opposite of that is **tadvīparyaya** (opposite of the opposite). What are these opposites? **Atmaninda** (self-blame), **paraprashansa** (praise of others), **sadgunodbhavana** (manifestation of good qualities), and **asadgunocchadana** (concealment of bad qualities). Humility in those who are excellent in qualities is called **nīcaivṛtti** (low attitude). Even though one is excellent in knowledge, etc., not being proud of it, i.e., being free from ego, is called **anutseka** (non-effort). These are the causes of **asrava** for the **ucca** **gotra**.

**[8661.]** Now, the cause of **asrava** for the **antaraya** (obstacle) karma, which comes after the **gotra**, is explained in the following sutra:

**Vighnakaranamaantarāyasya ॥27॥**

**[8662.]**  **Dana** (giving), etc., are mentioned in the sutra "**danalābhabhogopbhogavīryāṇi ca**".  To obstruct these is the **asrava** of **antaraya** karma.

Page #383:
---------------------------
## Chapter Six

[6127 8 662]

**The sixth chapter**

[263] **Obstacle.** The act of creating an obstacle is the **asrava** of **antaraya karma**. This should be understood.

**Question:** It has been stated that **tatpradosha**, **nihnava**, etc. are the causes of **asrava** for specific **karma** like **jnana-avaran** and **darshan-avaran**. Are they the causes of **asrava** only for these specific **karma** or for all **karma** in general?

If they are the causes of **asrava** only for specific **karma** like **jnana-avaran** and **darshan-avaran**, then it contradicts the **agama**. Because the **agama** states that seven **karma** (excluding **ayu**) are constantly flowing **asrava** at every moment. This would create a contradiction.

And if they are the causes of **asrava** for all **karma** in general, then it is not appropriate to mention them specifically.

**Answer:** Although **tatpradosha**, etc. do not have a rule of binding specific **karma** like **jnana-avaran** and **darshan-avaran**, they are still mentioned separately because they are the causes of binding specific **anubhaga**.

Thus ends the sixth chapter of the **Tattvartha-vrutti** named **Sarvartha-siddhi**. ||6||

**Explanation:**

We have discussed the causes. Their destruction is an obstacle. And the act of creating this obstacle is the **asrava** of **antaraya karma**.

**Doubt:** If **tatpradosha** and **nihnava**, etc. are said to be the causes of **asrava** for specific **karma** like **jnana-avaran** and **darshan-avaran**, are they the causes of **asrava** only for these specific **karma** or for all **karma** in general?

If they are the causes of **asrava** only for specific **karma** like **jnana-avaran** and **darshan-avaran**, then it contradicts the **agama**, because the **agama** states that seven **karma** (excluding **ayu**) are constantly flowing **asrava** at every moment. This would create a contradiction.

And if they are the causes of **asrava** for all **karma** in general, then it is not appropriate to mention them specifically.

**Solution:** Although **tatpradosha**, etc. do not have a rule of binding specific **karma** like **jnana-avaran** and **darshan-avaran**, they are still mentioned separately because they are the causes of binding specific **anubhaga**.

Thus ends the sixth chapter of the **Tattvartha-vrutti** named **Sarvartha-siddhi**. ||6||

1. - **Hetu-vishesh** - A., Ta., Na., Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #384:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

§ 663. The meaning of *āsrava* has been explained. At the beginning of its explanation, it was said, "Auspicious is the *puṇya*." This was said in a general way. To understand its specific meaning, the question arises, "What is auspicious?" The following *sūtra* answers this:
"To be free from violence, falsehood, stealing, non-celibacy, and attachment is a vow."

§ 664. *Sūtras* like "Violence is the harming of living beings due to carelessness" and others, explain the nature of violence and the other things mentioned. To refrain from them is called a vow. A vow is a rule that is taken upon oneself, like "This is to be done, and this is not to be done." 

**Objection:** Violence and the other things mentioned are specific results, not permanent. How can they be used in the ablative case?

**Solution:** The ablative case is used because the intention is to indicate permanent cessation through understanding. For example, in the phrase "He refrains from virtue," the person who is devoid of understanding thinks, "Virtue is difficult, and its fruit is attainable only through faith." Thus, he refrains from virtue due to his understanding. Similarly, here, the person who acts with understanding thinks, "These results of violence, etc., are the causes of sin. Those who engage in sinful actions are punished by kings in this very life, and they suffer in the afterlife." Thus, he refrains from violence, etc., due to his understanding. Therefore, it is appropriate to use the ablative case because the intention is to indicate permanent cessation through understanding.

The word *virati* should be combined with each word individually. For example:

1. "The restraints are non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment." (Pā. Yo. Sū. 2, 301)
2. "A vow is that which is taken upon oneself and is free from the objects of *virati*." (Ratna. 3, 401)
3. "The ablative case is used for permanent cessation." (Pā. 1, 4, 24)
4. "He refrains from virtue... This person is devoid of understanding." (Pā. M. Bhā. 1, 4, 3, 24)
5. "He refrains from virtue due to his understanding." (Pā. M. Bhā. 1, 4, 3, 24)
6. "This person acts with understanding." (Mā. M. Bhā. 1, 4, 3, 24)
7. "They suffer in the afterlife due to their understanding." (Mu., Vā. Nā.)

Page #385:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

[265]

The five vows are mentioned starting with non-violence. Non-violence is the most important vow, as the other vows, like truthfulness, are for its protection, like a fence around a field of grain. There is one vow in relation to Samayika, which is characterized by the cessation of all faults. The same vow is described as five-fold in relation to the cessation of the causes of rebirth. 

**Doubt:** This vow cannot be the cause of the flow of karmic matter, as it is included in the causes of restraint. Restraint will be explained later as including secrecy, etc.  There are ten types of Dharma, and one of them is called Samyama. Are the vows included in Samyama?

**Resolution:** This is not a fault, because restraint will be explained as cessation, and here we see activity. This is because the abandonment of violence, untruthfulness, and taking what is not given, leads to the activity of non-violence, truthfulness, and accepting what is given. These vows are also the means of restraint, such as secrecy, etc.  A person who has practiced the vows properly can easily practice restraint, so they are taught separately.

**Doubt:** There is a sixth Anuvrata called refraining from eating at night. Should this be included here?

**Resolution:** No, because it is included in the practices of mindfulness. The practices of mindfulness of non-violence will be explained later. One of these practices is mindfulness of food and drink taken in the light.

8665. To explain the difference between these five vows, the next sutra says: "From violence, etc., restraint in one place is Anuvrata, and restraint in all places is Mahavrata."

§ 666. The word "desh" means "one place," and the word "sarva" means "all." In the sutra, the words "desh" and "sarva" are combined in a compound word with the suffix "tas," forming the word "desh-sarvatah." The word "virati" is understood from the previous sutra. Here, the words "anu" and "mahat" are combined in a compound word, forming the word "anu-mahati." The word "vrata" is neuter gender, so the word "anu-mahati" is used in the neuter gender. These are related in order. For example, restraint in one place is Anuvrata, and

Page #386:
---------------------------
2661
Sarvarthasiddhi
[713 § 672
Sambadhyate. Veshato viratiranuvratam sarvato virati mahavrata iti dvidha bhiddyate pratyekam vratam. Etani mani bhavitani varoushadhavadyatnavate' duhkhanivrttinimittani bhavanti.
8667. Kimartham katham va bhavanam teshamityatrauchyate
Tat sthairyartham bhavanaha pancha pancha ||3||
8 668. Tesham vratanam sthirikaranaayakayakasya vratasya pancha pancha bhavana vedaityavyah. "Yevam adyasyahinssavrtasya bhavanaha ka ityatrauchyate
Vangmanoguptir yaadananikshepanasamitityalokitapanabhojanani pancha ||4||
$ 669. Vagguptih manoguptih iryasamitih adananiksepanasamitih alokitapanabhojan1. ratyetah panchahinssavrtasya bhavanaha.
8 670. Ath dvitiyasya vratasya ka ityatrauchyate-
Krodha lobha bhirutva hasyapratyakhyananyanuvichibhashanam cha pancha ||5||
§ 671. Krodhapratyakhyanam lobhapratyakhyanam bhirutvapratyakhyanam hasyapratyakhyanam anuvichibhashanam chetyetah pancha bhavanaha satyavratasya jneyah. Anuvichi bhashanam niravadyanubhashanmityartha. 8672. Idanim tritiyasya vratasya ka bhavana ityatraha shunyagaravimochitavasa paroparodhakarana bhaiksshuddhisadharmavisamvadaha pancha ||16||
To be completely free from all restrictions is the Mahavrata. In this way, each of the vows, beginning with ahimsa, are of two types. Those who are diligent and who practice these vows, which are like the best of medicines, will be free from suffering. 8667. For what purpose and how should one contemplate these vows? The next sutra answers this question:
There are five contemplations for each vow, to make them firm. ||3||
8 668. To make these vows firm, one should know five contemplations for each vow. If this is so, what are the contemplations for the first vow of ahimsa? The next sutra answers this question:
There are five contemplations for ahimsa: control of speech, control of mind, control of movement, control of taking and giving, and control of what is seen, drunk, and eaten. ||4||
8 669. Control of speech, control of mind, control of movement, control of taking and giving, and control of what is seen, drunk, and eaten: these are the five contemplations for ahimsa.
8 670. Now, what are the contemplations for the second vow? The next sutra answers this question:
There are five contemplations for satya: renunciation of anger, renunciation of greed, renunciation of fear, renunciation of laughter, and speaking truthfully. ||5||
8 671. Renunciation of anger, renunciation of greed, renunciation of fear, renunciation of laughter, and speaking truthfully: these are the five contemplations for satya. Anuvichibhashanam means speaking without fault. § 672. Now, what are the contemplations for the third vow? The next sutra answers this question:
There are five contemplations for asteya: living in a deserted house, living in a liberated house, helping others, purity of begging, and agreement with those of the same dharma. ||6||
1. Varoushadhavat duhkha

Page #387:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

**§ 678**

[267]

**8673.**  Residing in empty buildings, caves in mountains, hollows in trees, etc. is called *śūnyāgārāvāsa*. Residing in houses abandoned by others is called *vimocitāvāsa*. Not hindering others from staying is called *paroparodhākaraṇa*. Taking alms according to the rules of conduct is called *bhaikṣaśuddhi*. Not disagreeing with co-religionists by saying "this is mine, this is yours" is called *sadharmāvisamvāda*. These are the five *bhāvanās* of the *adattādānaviramana* vow.

**8674.** Now, the *bhāvanās* of the *brahmacarya* vow should be explained. Therefore, the next *sūtra* says:

Giving up listening to stories that arouse desire for women, giving up looking at their beautiful limbs, giving up remembering past pleasures, giving up aphrodisiac and desired tastes, and giving up the conditioning of one's own body - these are the five *bhāvanās* of the *brahmacarya* vow. || 7 ||

**§ 675.** The word *tyāga* should be combined with each word. For example: giving up listening to stories that arouse desire for women (*strīrāgakathā-śravaṇatyāga*), giving up looking at their beautiful limbs (*tanmanoharaṅganirīkṣaṇatyāga*), giving up remembering past pleasures (*pūrvartānusmaraṇatyāga*), giving up aphrodisiac and desired tastes (*vṛṣyeṣṭarasatyāga*), and giving up the conditioning of one's own body (*svaśarīrasamskāratyāga*) - these are the five *bhāvanās* of the *brahmacarya* vow.

**§ 676.** Now, the next *sūtra* explains what the *bhāvanās* of the fifth vow are:

Giving up attachment and aversion to the objects of the senses, both pleasant and unpleasant, are the five *bhāvanās* of the *aparagraha* vow. || 8 ||

**8677.** When the five senses, such as touch, come into contact with pleasant and unpleasant objects, giving up attachment and aversion to these five objects of touch, etc., are the five *bhāvanās* of the *ākiccaniya* vow.

**§ 678.** Just as these *bhāvanās* are understood for the sake of strengthening these vows, so also, for the sake of strengthening these vows, what should be done in relation to their opposites? The next *sūtra* explains this.

Page #388:
---------------------------
In the **Sarvarthasiddhi**, it is stated that the vision of **apaya** (negative consequences) and **avady** (blameworthy actions) in **himsa** (violence) and other **five vices** is essential both in this life and the next. 

**Apaya** refers to the destruction of actions leading to **abhyudaya** (worldly prosperity) and **nishreyasa** (spiritual liberation). **Avady** signifies blameworthy actions. The vision of both **apaya** and **avady** is crucial to understand the consequences of these vices.

**Violence:** A violent person is constantly subjected to distress and burdened by animosity. In this life, they face punishments like death, imprisonment, and suffering. After death, they are destined for an unfavorable rebirth and are considered blameworthy. Therefore, abandoning violence is the most beneficial path.

**False Speech:** A liar is untrustworthy and faces consequences like tongue-cutting in this life. They also suffer from the pain inflicted by those who have been deceived by their lies and face animosity from them. After death, they are destined for an unfavorable rebirth and are considered blameworthy. Therefore, abandoning false speech is the most beneficial path.

**Stealing:** A thief, obsessed with stealing others' possessions, is despised by all. In this life, they face punishments like torture, death, imprisonment, and mutilation of limbs. After death, they are destined for an unfavorable rebirth and are considered blameworthy. Therefore, abandoning stealing is the most beneficial path.

**Unchastity:** An unchaste person is driven by lust and behaves like a wild elephant separated from its mate, facing suffering and punishments like death, imprisonment, and torture. Their mind, clouded by lust, is incapable of discerning right from wrong. They indulge in sexual misconduct, leading to animosity and punishments like castration, death, imprisonment, and loss of possessions. After death, they are destined for an unfavorable rebirth and are considered blameworthy. Therefore, abandoning unchastity is the most beneficial path.

**Attachment:** Just as a bird, attracted to a piece of meat, is attacked by other birds, a person attached to possessions faces similar consequences.

Page #389:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

[269] Restraint is beneficial for the self. Just as a bird with a piece of meat in its beak is vulnerable to attack by other birds like crows, similarly, one who is attached to possessions is vulnerable to attack by others. They also incur many faults related to earning, protecting, and losing possessions. They never feel satisfied, just like fire is never satisfied with fuel. Due to excessive greed, they lose the ability to discern between right and wrong actions. After death, they are born in an unfavorable realm. They are also despised as greedy. Therefore, it is beneficial to renounce possessions. In this way, one should contemplate the harm and evil of violence and other vices.

[680] To explain the contemplation of violence and other vices, the following sutra is stated:

**They are indeed suffering.** [10]

[8681] One should contemplate that violence and other vices are indeed suffering. How are violence and other vices suffering? Because they are the cause of suffering. Just as it is said, "Food is life," because food is the cause of life, we refer to food as life. Similarly, violence and other vices are the cause of non-virtuous karma, and non-virtuous karma is the cause of suffering. Therefore, violence and other vices are suffering, either because they are the cause of suffering or because they are the cause of the cause of suffering. This contemplation of violence and other vices as suffering should be done with self-awareness and awareness of others.

**Objection:** All of these things are not necessarily suffering, because there is pleasure in enjoying sense objects.

**Response:** The apparent pleasure derived from enjoying sense objects is not true pleasure, but merely a temporary relief from pain, like scratching an itch.

[8682] The following sutra explains another aspect of contemplation:

Page #390:
---------------------------
## 270] Sarvarthasiddhi

[71118683 Maitri, Pramoda, Karuna, and Madhyasthya are the qualities of the soul, which are to be cultivated in the Sattva, Gunadhika, Klishyamana, and Avineya respectively. ||1||
8683. Maitri is the desire for the absence of suffering in others. Pramoda is the inner joy expressed through facial expressions and other means. Karuna is the feeling of compassion for the suffering. Madhyasthya is the absence of partiality based on attachment and aversion. The souls, called Sattva, are born in various births due to the consequences of their past actions. Those who have developed excellent qualities like Samyagjnana are called Gunadhika. Those who are suffering due to the arising of Asadyodaya are called Klishyamana. Those who do not have the qualities of hearing and understanding the truth are called Avineya. In these Sattva, etc., one should cultivate Maitri, etc., respectively. Maitri towards all beings, Pramoda towards Gunadhika, Karuna towards Klishyamana, and Madhyasthya towards Avineya. By cultivating these feelings, one attains perfection in the vows of Ahimsa, etc. 
8684. Further, the text says:
"For the sake of Samvega and Vairagya, one should contemplate the nature of the world and the body. ||12||
8685. The nature of the world is that it is beginningless, endless, and like a bamboo stick, a sieve, and a drum. In this beginningless cycle of existence, the soul wanders through various births, experiencing suffering for an infinite time. Nothing is permanent here. Life is like a water bubble, and material possessions are fleeting like lightning and rainbows. By contemplating the nature of the world in this way, one develops aversion to the world. The nature of the body is that it is impermanent, the cause of suffering, empty, and impure. In this way, one should contemplate the nature of the body. 
1. 'Maitri, Karuna, Mudita, and Upeksha are the feelings that arise towards happiness, suffering, virtue, and vice respectively. These feelings purify the mind.' - Pa. Yo. Su. 1, 33. 
2. 'Cleanliness, disgust towards one's own body, and aversion to contact with others.' - Pa. Yo. Su. 2, 40.

Page #391:
---------------------------
-7113 $ 687] Chapter Seven
[271 Contemplation of the nature of the body leads to detachment from attachment to objects. Therefore, one should contemplate the nature of the world and the body.
8686. Here the questioner says, "You have said that the vow is to abstain from violence, etc., but we do not know what specific actions constitute violence, etc." To this, it is said: It is impossible to explain all of them at once, but their characteristics can be explained in sequence. Therefore, to explain the nature of what was mentioned at the beginning, the following sutra is said:
Violence is the killing of living beings due to heedlessness. ||13||
8687. Heedlessness is the state of being accompanied by passions, and the result of the soul being in that state is called heedless. The action of the heedless is called heedless action. Therefore, violence is defined as the separation, as far as possible, of the ten vital breaths, including the senses, due to heedless action. This is the cause of suffering for living beings, and therefore the cause of unrighteousness. The qualifier "due to heedless action" is used to indicate that only the separation of vital breaths does not constitute unrighteousness. It is also said:
"Even if this being separates another from its vital breaths, it is not considered violence." And it is also said:
"If a small creature is crushed by the foot of a sage who is engaged in walking, and dies as a result, there is no mention of even a small amount of bondage due to that cause in the scriptures. Because, just as fainting is considered to be a form of attachment from a spiritual perspective, here too, the result of passions, etc., is considered to be violence."
Doubt: Even if the vital breaths are not destroyed, is violence still considered to be committed merely due to heedless action? It is also said:
1. Bhagavata Mu., Ta., Na. 2. Siddha. Dva. 3,16. 3. Pravachana. Kshe. 3,16. 4. Pravachana. Kshe. 3,171.

Page #392:
---------------------------
## 272]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[71148688  "A person who is devoid of *yatnaachar* (effortful conduct) commits violence even if he is living a life of *jiva* (living being).
A person who practices *yatnaachar* does not incur bondage even if he commits violence." This is not a fault. Here also, there is the destruction of life, which is the characteristic of the emotion. Thus, it is said:
"A careless soul destroys himself by himself.
Whether the killing of other beings in the past is followed by killing in the future or not." 8688. The characteristic of violence has been stated. Now, the next *sutra* (aphorism) states the characteristic of untruth, which is stated after violence.
Untruth is the statement of what is not true. ||14|| 8 689. The word *sat* (true) is indicative of praise. That which is not *sat* is *asat* (false). The statement of what is not true is untruth. *Rta* (truth) is *satya* (truth), and what is not *rta* is *anrta* (untruth). What then is *aprashastha* (unpraiseworthy)? That which causes suffering to living beings is *aprashastha*, whether it is related to an existing object or a non-existing object. It has been said earlier that the remaining vows are for the protection of the vow of non-violence. Therefore, one should be certain that speech that causes violence is untruth. 8 690. Now, the next *sutra* states the characteristic of theft, which is stated after untruth.
Taking what is not given is theft. ||15|| 8691. *Adana* (taking) means taking. Taking what is not given is *adattadana*, and this is called *steya* (theft). If this is so, then taking what is not given, like karma and speech, would also be theft, because it is not given by another? This is not a fault, because the practice of *steya* is only applicable where giving and taking are possible.
'Even if a person who is devoid of *yatnaachar* lives a life of *jiva*, he commits violence according to the rules. And a person who practices *yatnaachar* does not incur bondage even if he commits violence.'
Solution-This is not a fault, because here also, there is the destruction of life, which is the characteristic of the emotion. It is also said:
'A careless soul destroys himself by himself.
Whether the killing of other beings in the past is followed by killing in the future or not.'
868 8. The characteristic of violence has been stated. Now, the next *sutra* states the characteristic of untruth, which is stated after violence.
Speaking what is not true is untruth. ||15||
8689. The word *sat* (true) is indicative of praise. That which is not *sat* is *asat* (false). The statement of what is not true is untruth. *Rta* (truth) is *satya* (truth), and what is not *rta* is *anrta* (untruth). Doubt-What is *aprashastha* (unpraiseworthy)? Solution-That which causes suffering to living beings is *aprashastha*, whether it is related to an existing object or a non-existing object. It has been said earlier that the remaining vows are for the protection of the vow of non-violence. Therefore, one should be certain that speech that causes violence is untruth.
$690. Now, the next *sutra* states the characteristic of theft, which is stated after untruth.
Taking what is not given is theft. ||15||
8691. *Adana* (taking) means taking. Taking what is not given is *adattadana*, and this is called *steya* (theft). Doubt-If the above-mentioned meaning of *steya* is taken, then karma and 1, speech. 317. 2. There also, A. Di. 1, Di. 2. 3.  Violence protection Mu. 4. Karma speech Mu.

Page #393:
---------------------------
Jain terms preserved in the translation:

The Seventh Chapter
[273] From where? Due to the capacity of 'adatta' (taking what is not given) acquisition. Even if the monk wanders in towns, cities, etc., does he obtain 'adattadana' (taking what is not given) by entering through the streets, gates, etc.? No, there is no fault; because of general liberation. Thus, this monk does not enter the closed doors, etc. because of non-liberation. Or, it continues with 'pramattayogat' (due to negligence). What is taken due to negligence is called 'steya' (theft). And there is no negligence in the one who enters the streets, etc. Thus, it is said that where there is activity due to the transformation of affliction, there is 'steya' in the acquisition or non-acquisition of external objects.

8692. Now, the fourth 'abrahma' (non-celibacy) is described.
Mithuna (sexual intercourse) is 'abrahma'. ||16||
8693. When the rise of 'charitra-mohaniya' (deluding karma that destroys right conduct) occurs, the desire for mutual touch of the male and female afflicted by the transformation of attachment is called 'mithuna'. The activity of 'mithuna' is called 'maithuna'. Not all activity is so. Why? Because it is well-known in the world and scriptures. In the world, the activity of cowherds, etc. motivated by the transformation of attachment between male and female is called 'maithuna'. In the scriptures too, it is understood in the same way, as in "the desire for 'mithuna' in horses and bulls". Also, 'pramattayogat' continues, so the activity for the sake of sexual pleasure between male and female is understood as 'maithuna', not everything. The virtues like non-violence, etc. are not considered as 'karma' (activity).

Page #394:
---------------------------
274] Sarvarthasiddhi
171178294That which, when protected, grows and prospers is called Brahma. That which is devoid of it is called Abrahama. What is it? It is Maithuna. In it, vices like violence flourish. Because one who is inclined towards sexual indulgence, harms both mobile and immobile beings, speaks falsehood, takes what is not given, and accepts both conscious and unconscious possessions. 6694. Now, to explain the characteristics of the fifth possession, the next sutra says:
Moochha is possession. ||17||
8695. Now, the nature of Moochha is explained. Question: What is Moochha? Answer: The protection, acquisition, and cultivation of external objects like cows, buffaloes, gems, pearls, etc., both conscious and unconscious, and internal objects like attachment, etc., is Moochha. Question: In the world, there is a common understanding that a particular aggravation of wind, etc., is called Moochha. Why is this not considered here? Answer: This is true, but the general meaning of the root Moochha is delusion, and general words are applicable to their specific meanings. Therefore, the specific meaning of Moochha is considered here, because the topic is possession. Question: Even with this meaning of Moochha, external objects do not become possessions, because Moochha refers to the collection of internal possessions. Answer: This is correct, because the internal is considered the primary, and therefore, only the internal is collected. It is clear that even without external possessions, a person who has the thought "this is mine" is still possessed. Question: If external objects are not possessions, and if the thought "this is mine" is possession because it is the cause of Moochha, then knowledge, etc., also become possessions, because like the results of attachment, etc., there is also the thought "this is mine" in knowledge, etc.? Answer: This is not a fault, because "due to inattentiveness" is implied. Therefore, knowledge, perception, and conduct of an attentive person are not possessions. 1. Abrahama. What is Mu.। 2 Conscious and unconscious Mu.। 3.  Chyete. What is Moochha Mu. A., Di. 1, Di. 2.। 4.  Muktaadi Mu., Ta.। 5.   Tanaanam cha Raaga Mu.। 6.  Grihyate. Evam api Ta., Na.। 7. Sangrihyate. Asatyapi Mu.। 8.  Graho Bhavati Mu.। 9.  Tate. Gyaan A., Di. 1, Di. 2.

Page #395:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

**71188697**  The absence of delusion does not lead to unconsciousness, thus proving the absence of attachment. Furthermore, since knowledge, perception, and conduct are not objects of attachment and are inherent qualities of the soul, they are not subject to attachment. However, passions like attachment, aversion, and delusion arise from karmic activity and are not inherent qualities of the soul, making them objects of attachment. Therefore, the intention to possess them is considered attachment. All vices stem from this root. When the intention "this is mine" arises, it leads to actions like protection and preservation. These actions inevitably lead to violence. To achieve these ends, one resorts to falsehood, theft, and sexual misconduct. These actions result in various forms of suffering in hell and other realms.

**8696**  This chapter explains the characteristics of a person who observes the vices of violence, etc., and whose mind is devoted to the virtues of non-violence, etc., and who strives diligently to practice these virtues. Such a person, who observes the vows of non-violence, etc., is known as:

**A person free from the "arrow" (शल्य) is a vow-keeper (व्रती) || 18 ||**

**8697**  The word "शल्य" (arrow) is derived from the root "शृणाति हिनस्ति" (to pierce, to injure). It signifies anything that causes pain. When a thorn or other sharp object enters the body, it is called a "शल्य". Similarly, any mental or physical affliction is also referred to as a "शल्य". Just as a thorn causes harm to living beings, karmic afflictions, which cause mental and physical suffering, are also considered "शल्य". There are three types of "शल्य":

* **Maya-Shalya (Illusionary Arrow):** This refers to deception, trickery, and cunning.
* **Nidana-Shalya (Cause-Arrow):** This refers to the desire for worldly pleasures and possessions.
* **Mithyadarshan-Shalya (False Perception Arrow):** This refers to belief in falsehoods and lack of faith in truth.

A person who is free from these three types of "शल्य" is called a "Nishshalya Vrati" (a vow-keeper free from the arrow).

**Objection:**  One might argue that a person is called a "Vrati" (vow-keeper) because they observe the vows, not because they are free from the "Shalya". Just as Devadatta is not a king because he is associated with a scepter, but because he possesses the qualities of a king.

**Response:**  The objection is not valid because the phrase "प्रमत्तयोगात्" (due to negligence) is applicable here. A person who possesses knowledge, perception, and conduct, and is free from negligence, does not experience delusion. This absence of delusion proves the absence of attachment.

Page #396:
---------------------------
## 276]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[7119 § 698
Because of the superiority of the [true] vow. A vow is not merely related to the abstention from violence, etc., without the absence of blemishes. When blemishes are removed, a vow-taker is designated as such due to the relationship with the vow, just like a cow with much milk and ghee is called a "cow with much milk and ghee." In the absence of much milk and ghee, even if there are cows, they are not called "cows with much milk and ghee." Similarly, even if there are vows, one is not a vow-taker if there are blemishes. But one who is free from blemishes is a vow-taker.
$ 698 To understand the difference, it is said:
**Agari and Anagari** ||19||
8699. "Agara" means a house, which is embraced by those who seek refuge. One who has a house is "Agari." One who does not have a house is "Anagari." There are two types of vow-takers: Agari and Anagari.
**Objection:** But here, a contradiction arises. A muni who resides in an empty house or a temple would be "Agari" according to the above definition. And one who has not renounced the desire for objects, but has left home for some reason and lives in the forest, would be "Anagari."
**Solution:** This is not a fault, because "Bhavagara" is intended here. When the rise of the desire for worldly objects is overcome, the result that is not renounced from the house is called "Bhavagara." One who has this is "Agari," even if he lives in the forest. And one who does not have this, even if he lives in a house, is "Anagari."
**Objection:** An "Agari" cannot be a vow-taker, because he does not have complete vows.
**Solution:** This is not a fault, because even an "Agari" can be a vow-taker, like a resident of a city, in comparison to the Nayas of Naigama, etc. Just as one who lives in a house or a hut is still said to "live in the city," similarly, one who does not have complete vows is still a vow-taker in comparison to the Nayas of Naigama, Sangraha, and Vyavahara.
+ One cannot be a vow-taker simply by being related to the vow without being free from blemishes. For example, Devadatta cannot be an umbrella just because he has a stick in his hand.
**Solution:** To be a vow-taker, one must possess both qualities. If someone has not renounced blemishes and has only abandoned violence, etc., then he cannot be a vow-taker. Here, a vow-taker is desired who has renounced blemishes and accepted vows. Just as one who has a lot of ghee and milk is called a "cow with much milk and ghee." If he does not have ghee and milk, even if he has cows, he is not called a "cow with much milk and ghee." Similarly, even if there are vows, one is not a vow-taker if there are blemishes. But one who is free from blemishes is a vow-taker.
8698. Now, to explain the differences, the next sutra says:
**He is Agari and Anagari.** ||19||
8 699. "Agara" is what those who seek refuge embrace. "Agara" means a house. One who has a house is "Agari." And one who does not have a house is "Anagari." Thus, there are two types of vow-takers: Agari and Anagari.
**Doubt:** The definition of Agari and Anagari given above leads to a contradictory meaning. According to the above definition, a muni who resides in an empty house or a temple would be "Agari." And one who has not renounced the desire for objects, but has left home for some reason and lives in the forest, would be "Anagari."
**Solution:** This is not a fault, because "Bhavagara" is intended here. When the rise of the desire for worldly objects is overcome, the result that is not renounced from the house is called "Bhavagara." One who has this is "Agari," even if he lives in the forest. And one who does not have this, even if he lives in a house, is "Anagari."
**Doubt:** An "Agari" cannot be a vow-taker, because he does not have complete vows.
**Solution:** This is not a fault, because even an "Agari" can be a vow-taker, like a resident of a city, in comparison to the Nayas of Naigama, etc. Just as one who lives in a house or a hut is still said to "live in the city," similarly, one who does not have complete vows is still a vow-taker in comparison to the Nayas of Naigama, Sangraha, and Vyavahara. 1,  मात्रसम्ब  मु.। 2. प्नोति नैष आ., दि. 1, दि. 21 3 वृत्तिपरि- आ., दि 1, दि. 2 ।

Page #397:
---------------------------
Ah
-7121 $ 702] Chapter Seven
[277] It is explained.
8700. Here it is said, "Is one who has renounced one of the five great vows, an Agari?" No. What then? It is said that one who has renounced all five vows with a vow of restraint is called an Agari.
An Agari is one who has taken the Anuvratas. ||20||
8701. The word 'Anu' means 'small'. One who has small vows is called an Agari. How are his vows small? Because it is not possible for him to renounce all the five great vows completely. From what is he renounced? He is renounced from harming living beings, therefore his first Anuvrata is Ahimsa. Due to attachment and delusion, he renounces false speech because it can lead to the destruction of his home and village, therefore his second Anuvrata is Satya. A Shravak renounces taking what is not given because it is harmful to others and due to fear of the king, etc., but he still has a desire for it, therefore his third Anuvrata is Asteya. He renounces sexual intercourse with another's wife, whether she is accepted or not, therefore his fourth Anuvrata is Brahmacharya. He limits his possessions of wealth, grain, land, etc., according to his needs, therefore his fifth Anuvrata is Aparigraha.
$702. It is said, "Does an Agari who has not renounced his home have only these characteristics, or are there any others?" It is said that he is also endowed with the vows of Digvirati, Deshvirati, Anarthadandavirati, Samayikavat, Proshadhopavasavat, Upbhogparibhogparimanat, and Atithisambhagavat. ||21|| 1, -karparthiv Mu.

Page #398:
---------------------------
[278]
In the attainment of all good
- [71218  703 $ 703. The word 'virati' applies to each. Digvirati, deshvirati, anarthadandavirati, these three are gunavrata; because the word 'vrata' is connected with each. Similarly, samayaikavrata, proshadhopavasavrata, upbhogparibhogparimanavrata, atithisambhagavrata, these four are shikshavrata. One who is endowed with these vrata is called a grihi virata-avirata. For example, the directions east etc., by setting a limit with the help of well-known signs, is digvirativrata. Beyond that, the abandonment of violence towards the trembling and stationary beings, is mahavrat in that extent. Even if there is gain beyond that limit, the abandonment of the result, leads to the abandonment of greed. The area with a definite limit of villages etc., is called desh. The abandonment of going beyond that is deshvirativrata. Here also, as before, mahavrat is attained beyond the limit. The action which is not beneficial and is only the cause of sin, is anarthadand. To be free from it is anarthadandavirativrata. Anarthadand is of five types - apadhyan, papopadehs, pramadacharit, hinsapradan, and ashubhashruti. To think in the mind, how can there be victory, defeat, killing, binding, cutting of limbs, and taking away of others' wealth etc., is apadhyan. To speak words full of sin, in matters like causing suffering to the animals, promoting trade, and the beginning of violence towards living beings etc., is papopadehs. To do sinful actions like cutting trees, digging the earth, watering etc., without any purpose, is pramadacharit. To give poison, thorns, weapons, fire, rope, whip, and wood etc., the instruments of violence, is hinsapradan. To listen to and teach evil stories which increase violence and anger etc., is ashubhashruti. 'Sam' prefix is 1. Vratam. These are M. 2. Abandonment of the five sins in the place other than the boundary. Mahavrata is attained by the space of the country. Ratna. 3,5. 3. Manapradesho Mu. 4. 'Papopadehshimadadanapadhyanaduhthati: panch. Prahah pramadacharyamanarthadandanadandadharah ||' Ratna. 3, 51 5. -chhedasvahar A. Chhedasarvasvahar Di. 1, Di. 2. 6. 'Vadhbandhchhedadade?shadragaachcha parakalatradeh. Adhyanam apadhyanam shasati jinashamane vishadah ||' Ratna. 3,32. 7. Dhyanam. Pranivadhka A., Di. 1, Di. 2. 8. 'Tiryakklehsavanijyahimsaramhbhapralambhanadeenaam. Kathaprasangaprasavah smartavyah pap upadehs ||' Ratna. 3,30. 9. 'Kshitisalildahanpavanarammham vipalam vanaspaticchhedam. Saranam saranam api cha prasadacharyam prabhashante ||' Ratna. 3,34.

Page #399:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

**Giving aid to violence or violence itself is violence. Listening to, teaching, or engaging in evil stories that promote violence, anger, and other negative emotions is considered an evil sound. The term "same" (sameeka) refers to unity. For example, when we say "ghee is good, oil is good," we understand that "good" means unified. "Samaya" is the time of unity, and "Samayika" is the same as "Samaya." Alternatively, "Samayika" is the purpose of unity.  **

**One should understand that a person who is in "Samayika" for a certain period of time in a certain place is a "Mahavrat" (one who has taken the five great vows) just like before. Why? Because they have renounced all forms of violence, both subtle and gross. **

**Question:** If this is the case, then does a person in "Samayika" experience complete restraint? 

**Answer:** No, because the karmas that destroy restraint arise. 

**Question:** Then does this person lack the "Mahavrat"?

**Answer:** No, because it is understood through analogy, just like how "Chaitra" is considered ubiquitous in a royal family. 

**"Proshadha" refers to a festival. Fasting means abstaining from the objects of the five senses, such as sound, etc., and dwelling in the festival. In other words, fasting means abstaining from four types of food. Fasting during the "Proshadha" festival is called "Proshadhopavas."**

**A "Shravak" (lay follower) who is observing "Proshadhopavas" should abstain from bathing, perfumes, garlands, and ornaments due to the purification of their body. They should reside in a sacred place, a place of residence for the virtuous, a "Chaityalaya" (temple), or their designated "Proshadhopavas" house. They should engage their mind in listening to, reciting, and contemplating religious teachings. They should remain in a state of fasting and refrain from all beginnings. **

**Food, drink, perfumes, and garlands are considered "Upbhog" (consumption). Clothing, coverings, ornaments, beds, seats, houses, vehicles, and other things are considered "Paribhog" (enjoyment). The quantity of these two is called "Upbhog Paribhog Parimaan."**

**Honey, meat, and alcohol should always be avoided. One should always be mindful of the three poisons.  **

**Flowers like "Ketaki" and "Arjuna," roots like "Shrungvera," and other things that are the dwelling places of countless living beings and are worthy of being called "ananta-kaya" (infinite bodies) should be avoided because they are harmful and yield little benefit. **

Page #400:
---------------------------
## 2801
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[7122 § 704
Vehicles, ornaments, and other possessions are called *vyavahara*. Limiting their use is the *vyavahara-parimana* vow. One whose mind is free from violence should forever renounce honey, meat, and alcohol. One should also renounce flowers like *ketki* and *arjuna*, as well as ginger and radish, because they are the basis of the birth of many beings and are called *ananta-kaya*. This is because their consumption brings little benefit and harms many beings. One should consider that only a limited amount of vehicles, ornaments, etc., is beneficial for us, while the rest is harmful. Thus, one should renounce whatever is harmful for a certain period or for life, as per one's capacity.

One who walks without destroying *samyama* is called an *atithi*. Alternatively, one whose arrival has no fixed date is called an *atithi*. This means that one whose arrival time is not fixed is called an *atithi*. To make arrangements for such an *atithi* is called *atithi-samvibhaga*. It is of four types: *bhiksha*, *upakarana*, *aushadha*, and *pratiśraya*, i.e., lodging. One who is dedicated to liberation, devoted to *samyama*, and pure should be given pure and faultless *bhiksha* with a pure mind. One should give *dharmopakarana* that enhances *samyagdarshana*, etc. One should also provide appropriate *aushadha*. And one should provide lodging with utmost faith in the Dharma. The word 'cha' in the sutra is used to indicate the collection of household duties that will be mentioned later.
$ 704. What else is there?
And one who joyfully practices *maranantika sallekhana* is also an *atithi*. ||22||
$ 705. The destruction of lifespan, senses, and the three powers of mind, speech, and body, due to specific causes, is called death. The word 'anta' is used in the sutra to indicate the knowledge of death in that very existence. Death is the end, *marananta*. One whose purpose is this *marananta* is called *maranantika*. The proper inscription of the body and the passions is called *sallekhana*. This means the proper inscription of the external body and the internal passions, along with the gradual elimination of their causes. One who practices *maranantika sallekhana* with joy is called *maranantika*.

Page #401:
---------------------------
[281
-7122 8705]
Chapter Seven is connected. Should it be said that it is served with clear meaning? No; because of the possibility of a special meaning. It is not only served here. What then? It is also for pleasure. Because, if there is no pleasure in the truth, then the Sallekhana is not performed by force. The one who is truly pleased does it himself. Would it be an opinion that he is committing suicide; because of the abandonment of life, etc., with his own intention? 
:: Because of non-negligence. It has been said, "Killing of life due to negligence is violence." And he is not negligent. Why? Because of the absence of attachment, aversion, and delusion. For one who is possessed by attachment, aversion, and delusion, due to the use of poison and weapons, etc., according to the science of poisons, he commits suicide. The one who has taken Sallekhana does not have attachment, etc., therefore he is not guilty of self-destruction. And it is said,
"It is seen in this time that the absence of attachment, etc., is non-violence.
The Jinas have declared their arising to be violence." And, because death is undesirable, just as a merchant engaged in giving, taking, and accumulating various goods does not desire the destruction of his own house. And if, due to circumstances, the causes of its destruction arise, he removes them as much as possible. And if they cannot be removed, he strives so that the goods are not destroyed. Similarly, a householder, engaged in the accumulation of the goods of vows and conduct, does not desire the fall of his support. By reducing the causes that nourish the body and the passions, gradually, doing good writing, i.e., cultivating, is Sallekhana. The meaning of this sutra is that the householder who serves this Sallekhana, which takes place at the end of death, with pleasure. 
Doubt: To make the meaning clear in a natural way, it is right to say "served" in place of "nourished" in the sutra. Solution: No; because by keeping the action "nourished", a special meaning is conveyed from it. Here, not only the meaning of "serving" is taken, but also the meaning of "pleasure", because if there is no pleasure, Sallekhana is not performed by force. But if there is pleasure, the being himself performs Sallekhana. The meaning is that the meaning of "serving with pleasure" comes out from the action "nourished", not from "served", therefore the action "nourished" has been kept in the sutra. Doubt: Since in Sallekhana, life, etc., is abandoned with one's own intention, therefore is it suicide? Solution: This is not a fault, because there is no negligence in Sallekhana. It has been said before, "Killing of life due to negligence is violence." But there is no negligence in this, because attachment, etc., are not found in it. One who is possessed by attachment, aversion, and delusion, and who, by using poison and weapons, etc., commits suicide, is guilty of suicide. But the being who has taken Sallekhana does not have attachment, etc., therefore he is not guilty of suicide. It is also said, "It is taught in the scriptures that the non-arising of attachment, etc., is non-violence. And the Jinas have declared their arising to be violence." Secondly, death is not desirable for anyone. Just as a merchant engaged in giving, taking, and accumulating various goods does not desire the destruction of his own house. And if, due to circumstances, the causes of its destruction arise, he removes them as much as possible. And if they cannot be removed, he strives so that the goods are not destroyed. Similarly, a householder, engaged in the accumulation of the goods of vows and conduct, does not desire the fall of his support. If, by chance, the causes of their destruction arise, he strives to remove them so that there is no hindrance to his virtues. And if they cannot be removed, 1. ti bhasidam sa- mu. 2. -shakti cha pari- mu.

Page #402:
---------------------------
## 282] Sarvarthasiddhi

[7123 $ 706] He avoids it by opposing his own qualities, because the cause of its arising is present. And in the case of what is difficult to avoid, he strives so that his own qualities are not destroyed. How then can there be self-destruction?

8706. Here, the doubter says, "A Vrati is free from blemishes," and there, the third blemish is false vision. Therefore, a Vrati with right vision should be free from blemishes. Now, tell us, is that right vision with blemishes or without blemishes? It is said: Due to a particular state of delusion in someone, these blemishes arise: doubt, desire, uncertainty, praise of another vision, and commendation of another vision. These are the five transgressions of right vision. ||23||

8707. The absence of doubt, etc., was explained in the sutra "Purity of vision." These doubts, etc., should be known as their opposites. What is the difference between praise and commendation? Praise is the mental arousal of the qualities of false vision and misconduct, and commendation is the statement of the qualities that are or are not present in false vision. This is the difference between the two. Now, right vision is said to have eight limbs, so its transgressions should also be eight. This is not a fault, because the Acharya will later speak of five transgressions each for vows and conduct. Therefore, the other transgressions are included in these two transgressions of praise and commendation, and only five transgressions of right vision are mentioned.

8708. He says, "The transgressions of right vision have been mentioned." Are there also transgressions of vows and conduct in the same way? Yes, having said this, he now speaks the following sutra to indicate the number of those transgressions:

There are five transgressions each for vows and conduct, in order. ||24||

Page #403:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

[283
8709. The term "vratashīla" is a compound word formed by combining "vrat" and "shīla". In these vratashīlas, the inclusion of the term "shīla" is not redundant. The inclusion of "shīla" is for the purpose of explaining the specific meaning and for the protection of the vows. Therefore, by including "shīla", terms like "digvirati" are included.
§ 710. In the context of householders, the five transgressions of each of the vows and conduct should be understood in the order they are mentioned. As follows: First, the transgressions of the vow of non-violence are:
Bondage, killing, mutilation, excessive burdening, and deprivation of food and water. || 25 ||
8711. Bondage is the cause of preventing someone from going to their desired place. Striking living beings with a stick, whip, or cane, etc. is killing. Here, killing does not mean the separation of life, because the violence is abandoned before the transgression. Mutilation is the cutting off of limbs like ears, nose, etc. Excessive burdening is loading more than the appropriate weight. Depriving cows, etc. of food and water by causing them hunger and thirst is deprivation of food and water. These are the five transgressions of the vow of non-violence.
False advice, secret disclosure, forgery, misappropriation, and alteration of sacred mantras are the five transgressions of the vow of truthfulness. || 26 ||
8712. False advice is to lead someone to a wrong path in actions that are the cause of progress and liberation, or to deceive others with false words. Secret disclosure is the revelation of a specific action performed in private by a man and a woman. Forgery is when someone says that something was done by another person, even though the other person did not say or do it, and it is done because of the use of another person's words.

Page #404:
---------------------------
## 284] Sarvarthasiddhi

[71278713] Writing something deceptively is *Kūṭalekhakriyā*. If someone who has deposited silver, etc., forgets the quantity and takes less, accepting it as correct is *Nyāsāpahāra*.  Revealing someone else's secret due to financial reasons, a case, bodily ailment, or confusion, etc., out of envy is called *Sākāramantra-bheda*. These are the five transgressions of the *Satyānuvrat*.

*Stenaprayoga*, *Stenāhr̥tādāna*, *Viruddharājya-atikrama*, *Hīnādhika-mān-unmāna*, and *Pratiropakavyavahāra* are the five transgressions of the *Achauryānuvrat*.  ||27||

8713.  To instigate someone to steal, or to have someone else instigate them, or to approve of the instigation is *Stenaprayoga*. To accept something brought by a thief, without having instigated or approved of it, is *Stenāhr̥tādāna*.  To accept something in a way that is not in accordance with the proper law is *Atikrama*.  A hostile kingdom is *Viruddharājya*.  To transgress the rules of conduct in a hostile kingdom is *Viruddharājya-atikrama*.  If one finds things available at a low price in a hostile kingdom, to try to sell them at a high price is *Viruddharājya-atikrama*.  *Prāstha*, etc., are measures of length, and *Tulā*, etc., are measures of weight.  To give someone less than the proper measure and to take more than the proper measure for oneself, etc., is *Hīnādhika-mān-unmāna*.  To deal with someone deceptively using artificial silver, etc., is *Pratiropakavyavahāra*.  These are the five transgressions of the *Adattādānānuvrat*.

*Paravivāha-karaṇa*, *Itvarikā-parigr̥hītā-agaman*, *Itvarikā-aparigr̥hītā-agaman*, *Anangakrīḍā*, and *Kāma-tīvrā-abhiniveśa* are the five transgressions of the *Svādārāsantoṣānuvrat*. ||28||

8714.  To take a girl in marriage is *Vivāha*.  To marry someone else's wife is *Paravivāha*.  To arrange someone else's marriage is *Paravivāha-karaṇa*.

Page #405:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

[285]

**Action:**  To go to another man's house is called *itvari*.  *Itvari* is a woman who is inclined to go to another man's house.  *Itvarika* is a woman who is extremely inclined to go to another man's house.  Here, the suffix 'ka' is added to *itvari* in a derogatory sense.  A woman who has one husband is called *parigrihita*.  A woman who is a prostitute or an adulteress and goes to other men's houses and has no husband is called *apariagrihita*.  The going of a *parigrihita* *itvari* is called *itvarika parigrihita gaman*, and the going of an *apariagrihita* *itvari* is called *itvarika aparigrihita gaman*.  Here, the word *anga* means procreation and womb.  And, playing outside of these is called *ananga krid*.  The increased outcome of desire is called *kamativra abhinivesha*.  These are the five transgressions of the *svadara santosha* anuvrata.

**Field, house, gold, gold, wealth, grain, maidservant, servant, and fragrant substances:**  The transgression of the measure of field and house, the transgression of the measure of gold and gold, the transgression of the measure of wealth and grain, the transgression of the measure of maidservant and servant, and the transgression of the measure of fragrant substances are the five transgressions of the *parigraha parimana* anuvrata. ||29||

$715$.  The land that produces grain is called *kshetra*.  A house is called *vastu*.  *Hiranya* is the system of transactions involving silver, etc.  *Suvarna* is understood.  Cows, etc. are taken from *dhan*.  Rice, etc. are taken from *dhana*.  Servant women and men together are called *dasidas*.  Silk, cotton, and *kosa* cloth, and sandalwood, etc. are called *kupya*.  *Kshetra* and *vastu* are *kshetravastu*, *hiranya* and *suvarna* are *hiranyasuvarna*, *dhan* and *dhana* are *dhanadhana*, *das* and *das* are *dasidas*, and *kshetra*, *vastu*, *hiranyasuvarna*, *dhanadhana*, *dasidas*, and *kupya* are *kshetravastuhiranyasuvarnadhanadhanadasidasakupya*.  Having decided that my possessions are only this much and no more, to increase the measure of *kshetravastu*, etc. out of greed is called *pramanatikram*.  Thus, these are the five transgressions of the *parigraha parimana* anuvrata.

$716$.  The transgressions of the vows have been stated.  Now, the transgressions of the conduct will be stated.  They are as follows:

Page #406:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**286] Sarvarthasiddhi**

[71308717  Urdhvaadhasttiryagvyatikramkshetravruddhismrityantaraadhaanaani ||30|| $ 717. Parimitasya digavadheratilamghanamatikramh. Sa samaasatas trividhah -
Urdhvaatikramh adho'tikramh tiryagatikramh cheti. Tatra parvataadyarohaanaadurdhvaatikramh. Kupaavataraanaaderadho'tikramh. Bilapraveshaadeh tiryagatikramh. Parigrihiitaayaa disho lobhaaveshaadaadhikyaabhisandhih kshetravruddhih. Sa sho'tikramh pramadaanmohaadvyasaangaadvaa bhavatityavaseyah. Ananusmaranm smrityantaraadhanam. Ta ete digviramanasyatichaaraah.
Aayanapreshyaprayogashabdarupanupaatpudgalakshepaah ||31|| 8718. Aatmana sankalpita deshe sthitasya prayojanavashaat kichidaanayetyaajnaapanam aayanam. Evam kuviti niyogah preshyaprayogah. Vyaapaarakaraanpurushan pratyaabhyutkaasikaadhikaranm shabdhanupaatah. Stravigrahadarshanm rupaanupaatah. Loshtaadinipatah pudgalakshepah. Ta ete deshaviramanasya panchaatichaaraah. Kandarpkautkuchyamoukharayasameekshyaadhikaranopbhogparibhogaanarthkyani ||32||
8 719. Raagoudrekattprahaasamishro'shishtavaakprayogah kandarp. Tadevo bhayam paratra dushtkaayakarmaprayuktam kautkuchyam. Dhaastaryaprayam yatkinbanaanarthakam bahupralapitvam moukharyam. Asameekshya prayojanam aadhikyaena karanam asameekshyaadhikaranam. Yaavataa'rthenopbhogparibhogau so'rthastato'nyasyaadhikya

**Urdhvaavyatikram, Adhoavyatikram, Tiryagvyatikram, Kshetravruddhi and Smrityantaraadhan are the five aticharas of Digvirati Vrat.** ||30||
8717. **Atikram** is the transgression of the established limits of a direction. It is of three types: **Urdhvaatikram**, **Adho'tikram** and **Tiryagatikram**.  **Urdhvaatikram** occurs when one climbs a mountain or similar elevation beyond the limit. **Adho'tikram** occurs when one descends into a well or similar depth beyond the limit. **Tiryagatikram** occurs when one enters a burrow or similar space beyond the limit. **Kshetravruddhi** is the intention to expand the limit of a direction due to greed. This atikram can occur due to carelessness, delusion or bias. **Smrityantaraadhan** is the forgetting of the established limit. These are the five aticharas of Digvirati Vrat.

**Aayan, Preshyaprayog, Shabdhanupaat, Rupaanupaat and Pudgalakshep are the five aticharas of Deshaviriti Vrat.** ||31||
8718. **Aayan** is the command to bring something to a person residing in a place decided by oneself, for a specific purpose. **Preshyaprayog** is the command to do something in a particular way. **Shabdhanupaat** is the use of words like "cough" etc. to address people engaged in a particular profession. **Rupaanupaat** is the showing of one's body to those people. **Pudgalakshep** is the throwing of a clod of earth or similar object. These are the five aticharas of Deshaviriti Vrat.

... **Kandarp, Kautkuchy, Moukhary, Asameekshyaadhikaran and Upbhogparibhogaanarthakya are the five aticharas of Anarthadandhaviriti Vrat.** ||32||
719. **Kandarp** is the use of indecent language mixed with humor due to intense passion. **Kautkuchy** is the use of both humor and indecent language along with physical misconduct towards others. **Moukhary** is the meaningless talkativeness for the sake of being bold. **Asameekshyaadhikaran** is the performance of an action beyond the limit without considering the purpose. **Upbhogparibhogaanarthakya** is the use of something for a purpose other than the one for which it was intended.

Page #407:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven

**[287 Meaninglessness]**

These are the five transgressions of the Anarthadanda-virati vow:

* **Yoga-dus-pranidhana:**  This refers to the improper application of yoga, which can be of three types:
    * **Kaya-dus-pranidhana:** Improper application of the body.
    * **Vachan-dus-pranidhana:** Improper application of speech.
    * **Mano-dus-pranidhana:** Improper application of the mind.
* **Anadar:** Lack of enthusiasm or respect.
* **Smriti-anupasthana:** Lack of mindfulness.

These are the five transgressions of the Samayika vow:

* **A-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-utsarga:**  This refers to the disposal of waste without proper observation and purification.
* **A-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-adana:** This refers to the taking of objects without proper observation and purification.
* **A-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-sanstara-upkramana:** This refers to the use of bedding without proper observation and purification.
* **Anadar:** Lack of enthusiasm or respect.
* **Smriti-anupasthana:** Lack of mindfulness.

These are the five transgressions of the Proshdha-upavasa vow:

* **A-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-utsarga:**  This refers to the disposal of waste without proper observation and purification.
* **A-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-adana:** This refers to the taking of objects without proper observation and purification.
* **A-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-sanstara-upkramana:** This refers to the use of bedding without proper observation and purification.
* **Anadar:** Lack of enthusiasm or respect.
* **Smriti-anupasthana:** Lack of mindfulness.

**Meaninglessness** is the act of possessing more than what is necessary. This is a transgression of the Anarthadanda-virati vow.

**[8720]** Three types of yoga have been explained. Improper application of yoga is called **Yoga-dus-pranidhana**, which can be of three types: **Kaya-dus-pranidhana**, **Vachan-dus-pranidhana**, and **Mano-dus-pranidhana**. Lack of enthusiasm is called **Anadar**, and lack of mindfulness is called **Smriti-anupasthana**. These are the five transgressions of the Samayika vow.

**[8721]** To observe with the eyes whether a being exists or not is called **pratyavekshana**. To use a soft instrument to achieve a purpose is called **pramajita**. These two terms are connected to the next three terms: **utsarga**, **adana**, and **upkramana**. For example, the disposal of waste on the ground without proper observation and purification is called **a-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-utsarga**. Taking objects without proper observation and purification is called **a-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-adana**. Using bedding without proper observation and purification is called **a-pratyavekshita-a-pramajita-sanstara-upkramana**. Lack of enthusiasm in performing necessary tasks due to hunger is called **Anadar**. The meaning of **Smriti-anupasthana** has already been explained. These are the five transgressions of the Proshdha-upavasa vow.

Page #408:
---------------------------
##  Satyārthasiddhi 288:

**Verse 35:**

* **Saccittaāhāra, Sambandhaāhāra, Sammiśrāhāra, Abhishavāhāra, and Duṣpakvāhāra** are the five transgressions of the vow of *bhoga-upabhoga-parisankhyāna*.

**Verse 36:**

* **Saccittanikṣepa, Saccittāpidhāna, Paravyapadesha, Matsarya, and Kālatīkrama** are the five transgressions of the vow of *atithi-sanvibhāga-śīla*.

**Verse 37:**

* **Jīvitāśaṁsā, Maraṇāśaṁsā, Mitrānurāga, Sukhānubandha, and Nidāna** are the five transgressions of *sallekhanā*.

Page #409:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seven
[289

**A special kind of attachment to memory is the cause of happiness.** The mind is constantly given to that which is desired for enjoyment, and this is the cause. These are the five transgressions of Sallekhana.

8725. Here, in the description of the karma-asrava that is the cause of becoming a Tirthankara, it was said, "by strength, by renunciation, by austerity." Again, in the description of the vows, it was said, "the vow of sharing with guests." The nature of this giving has not been known yet, so it is explained here:

**Giving is the renunciation of one's own possessions for the sake of benefit.** ||38||

8726. Benefit is the welfare of oneself and others. The welfare of oneself is the accumulation of punya; the welfare of others is the increase of right knowledge, etc. The word "own" refers to wealth. It should be understood that giving is the renunciation of one's own possessions for the sake of benefit.

8727. Here, it is said, "Giving has been described, but is its fruit the same for all, or is there some difference?" To this, it is said:

**There is a difference in giving due to the difference in the method, the object given, the giver, and the recipient.** ||39||

8728. The order of accepting, etc., is the method. The difference arises from the qualities. This word "difference" should be connected with each of the words "method," etc. Thus, there is a difference in the method, a difference in the object given, a difference in the giver, and a difference in the recipient. The difference in the method is the difference in respect and disrespect in accepting, etc. The difference in the object given is that which causes the increase of austerity, study, etc. The difference in the giver is the absence of envy, sorrow, etc. The difference in the recipient is being endowed with the qualities that are the cause of liberation. Just as there is a difference in the earth, etc., and therefore a difference in what is born from it...

Page #410:
---------------------------
[290] Sarvarthasiddhi
[71398728Mokshakaram agunasya upaha patravisheshah. Tathacha punyaphala visheshah kshityadi visheshad bijaphala visheshavat.
Iti tattvarthavattau sarvarthasiddhi sanjnikayaam saptamo'dhyayah. ||7||
Just as there is a difference in the seed, so too there is a difference in the merit obtained from charity due to the difference in the method, etc.
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Tattvarthavritti called Sarvarthasiddhi. ||7||
1. Kshetradi - Mu.

Page #411:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

The nature of *āsrava* has been explained. Now, the nature of *bandha*, which is the next topic, should be explained. While explaining *bandha*, the causes of *bandha* are mentioned first, because *bandha* occurs due to them. 

**False belief, non-restraint, carelessness, passions, and karmic activities are the causes of *bandha*.**

**Explanation:**

* **False belief** etc. have already been explained. Where? 
    * **False belief** has been explained in the aphorism "Faith in the true nature of things is right belief." It is the opposite of right belief. 
    * **False belief** has also been explained in the twenty-five actions while explaining *āsrava*.
    * **Non-restraint** has been explained. Its opposite, **restraint**, should be understood.
    * **Carelessness** is included in the actions of **violating the injunctions** and **lack of desire**. 
    * **Carelessness** is the lack of respect for good actions.
    * **Passions** are anger, etc., which are of many types due to their different effects, non-rejection, rejection, and agitation. 
    * These have also been explained earlier. Where? 
    * They have been explained in the aphorism "Passions of the senses."
    * **Karmic activities** are of three types, based on body, speech, and mind. 
    * These have also been explained earlier. Where? 
    * They have been explained in the aphorism "Karmic activities of body, speech, and mind."

**False belief is of two types: innate and acquired through instruction.**

* **Innate false belief** is the lack of faith in the true nature of things, which arises due to the emergence of the karma of false belief, without any instruction.
* **Acquired false belief** is of four types: 
    * **Action-based**, 
    * **Non-action-based**, 
    * **Ignorant**, and 
    * **Deceptive**.

**Or, false belief is of five types:**

* **Absolute false belief**, 
* **Opposite false belief**, 
* **Doubtful false belief**, 
* **Mixed false belief**, and 
* **Ignorant false belief**.

Page #412:
---------------------------
## 292] Sarvarthasiddhi

[811 $ 732  Thus. There, this is the same, this is the same, this is the exclusive attachment to Dharma and Dharmi. "This whole universe is Purusha" or "Everything is eternal" or "Everything is non-eternal". Considering the bound as unbound, the Kevali as a Kavalahari, and a woman as Siddha, etc. are all examples of Viparyaya Mithyadarshana. Whether Samyagdarshana, Samyagjnana, and Samyakcharitra together constitute the path to liberation or not, not accepting any one side is Samshaya Mithyadarshana. Considering all Devatas and all religions as equal is Vainayika Mithyadarshana. Being devoid of the examination of what is beneficial and what is harmful is Agnanika Mithyadarshana. It is said:

"There are 180 types of Kriyavadis, 84 types of Akriyavadis, 64 types of Agnanis, and 32 types of Vainayikas." 8732. Avirati is of twelve types due to the non-compassion towards the six-bodied beings and the difference in the objects of the six senses. Sixteen Kashayas and nine Nokashayas, these are twenty-five Kashayas. Although there is a slight difference between Kashayas and Nokashayas, it is not intended here, therefore, all are called Kashayas. Four Manoyogas, four Vachanayogas, and five Kayayogas, these are thirteen types of Yoga. In the Pramatta-Samyata Gunasthan, Aharaka-Riddhihari Muni's Aharaka-Kayayoga and Aharaka-Mishra-Kayayoga are also possible, thus Yoga becomes fifteen. Due to the difference in the subject matter like Shuddhayashtak and Uttama-Kshama, etc., Pramada is of many types. Thus, these five, Mithyadarshana, etc., together or separately, are the causes of bondage. The explanation is as follows:

- Mithyadarshana, in the case of a Jiva, all five together are the causes of bondage.
- In the case of Sasadan-Samyagdarshana, Samyag-Mithyadarshana, and Avirata-Samyagdarshana, Avirati, etc., are four causes of bondage.
- In the case of Samyata-Samyata, both Virati and Avirati are mixed, and Pramada, Kashaya, and Yoga are the causes of bondage.
- In the case of Pramatta-Samyata, Pramada, Kashaya, and Yoga are the three causes of bondage.

1. "This is eternal" etc. Mu, Di 1, Di 2, A.
2. Go. Karma, Ga. 8761
3. "Yaanam cha hoi" Mu.
4. "Sattacchhanna" M.
5. "Shayaah Ishdam" Di 1, Di 2, A.
6. "Dasha bhavanti" A, Di 1, Di 2.
7. "Anekavidhah panchasamititriguptaishuddhay" Mu, A, Di 1, Di 2.
8. "Bhedat. Shuddhayashtakasyartha bhavakayavinayeryapathabhikshapratisthapanashyanasanavakyashuddhyo'shti dasha lakshanodharmascha. Te ete" Mu, A, Di 1, Di 2.

Page #413:
---------------------------
## Chapter 8

**293** The four types of karmic poisons are: apramāda, etc. There is only one type of yoga for the upaśānta-kaṣāya, kṣīṇa-kaṣāya, and sayoga-kevali. There is no yoga for the ayoga-kevali. 

**8733** The causes of bondage have been stated. Now, bondage will be explained. Therefore, the sūtra says:

**2** Due to being with kaṣāya, the jīva takes in karmic particles that are suitable for karma. This is bondage.

**8734** One who lives with kaṣāya is called sakaṣāya. The state of being sakaṣāya is called sakaṣāyatva. Therefore, due to being sakaṣāya. This is a statement of the cause. Just as one takes food according to the digestive fire, similarly, one experiences states and perceptions according to the intensity of the kaṣāya. The sūtra uses the word "sakaṣāyatvāt" to reiterate the cause in order to explain this particular characteristic. 

The sūtra uses the word "jīva" to answer the question: "How does the formless and handless soul take in karma?" The meaning of the word "jīva" is derived from "jīvanāt jīvaḥ" - one who lives, i.e., one who sustains life, one who has a lifespan, one who does not lack life. 

The sūtra uses the short phrase "karma-yogya" to convey the meaning. However, it uses the separate case ending "karmaṇo yogya" to indicate another sentence. What is that other sentence? "The jīva becomes sakaṣāya due to karma." This means that "karmaṇo" is a statement of the cause, meaning that the jīva becomes sakaṣāya due to karma. There is no coating of kaṣāya on a jīva without karma. This establishes the eternal relationship between the jīva and karma. This also answers the question: "How does the formless jīva become bound to the material karma?" Otherwise, if bondage is considered to have a beginning, then the absence of bondage would be implied for the Siddha, who possesses ultimate purity. 

The second sentence is "karmaṇo yogya puḍgalān ādatte." Due to the meaning, the case ending changes, and the sixth case ending is used instead of the previous case ending that indicated the cause. The word "puḍgal" is used to indicate the identity of karma.

Page #414:
---------------------------
## 294] Sarvarthasiddhi

1813 8735 Thus, the inherent quality of the soul is refuted, as it cannot be the cause of the cycle of existence. The word 'ādatte' is used to explain the cause and the effect. Therefore, due to the attachment arising from false perception, etc., the soul, which is permeated by all states of existence, is bound by the subtle, single-field-perceiving, infinite and innumerable particles, which are fit for karmic activity, without any division. This is called bondage. Just as various kinds of seeds, flowers, and fruits, when placed in a particular vessel, undergo a transformation into the form of liquor, similarly, the particles residing in the soul, due to the influence of yoga and kṣaya, undergo a transformation in the form of karma. The word 'saḥ' is used to negate other possibilities. This is the bondage, there is no other. Thus, the bondage of the quality and the qualified is refuted. The word 'bandha' should be explained in terms of karma and other means. 8735. It is asked, is this bondage one and the same, or are there different types of it? To this, it is said:

There are four types: nature, state, experience, and region. ||3|| 8736. Nature means inherent quality. What is the nature of neem? Bitterness. What is the nature of jaggery? Sweetness. Similarly, what is the nature of the knowledge-obscuring karma? Non-understanding of the object. What is the nature of the perception-obscuring karma? Non-association with objects worthy of perception. In this way, the sixth case ending is obtained. The word 'pudgala' in the sūtra is used to show the identity of karma with the soul. This refutes the idea that the soul has an inherent quality. Because, if it is considered to be the inherent quality of the soul, it cannot be the cause of the cycle of existence. The word 'ādatte' in the sūtra is used to explain the cause and the effect. This means that due to the attachment arising from false perception, etc., the soul, which is permeated by all states of existence, is bound by the subtle, single-field-perceiving, infinite and innumerable particles, which are fit for karmic activity, without any division. This is called bondage. Just as various kinds of seeds, flowers, and fruits, when placed in a particular vessel, undergo a transformation into the form of liquor, similarly, the particles residing in the soul, due to the influence of yoga and kṣaya, undergo a transformation in the form of karma. The word 'saḥ' in the sūtra is used to negate other possibilities. This is the bondage, there is no other. Thus, the bondage of the quality and the qualified is refuted. Here, the word 'bandha' should be explained in terms of karma and other means.

**Special Meaning:** This sūtra mainly explains bondage. Even though the soul substance has an independent existence, it has been subject to karma since time immemorial, due to which it has to wander through various realms like humans, hell beings, etc. The question is, why is the soul subject to karma, and what is the nature of that karma? This sūtra provides a comprehensive answer to both these questions. The sūtra states that due to karma, the soul becomes afflicted with kṣaya, and this leads to the attachment of particles fit for karmic activity. This is bondage. This implies two things. Firstly, that karma causes impurity in the soul, and this impurity leads to the bondage of karma. Secondly, that this bondage between the soul and karma is eternal and immemorial. Thus, this sūtra explains what bondage is and what causes it.

8735. To explain whether this bondage is one or has different types, the next sūtra says:

There are four types: nature, state, experience, and region. ||3||

8736. Nature means inherent quality. What is the nature of neem? Bitterness. What is the nature of jaggery? Sweetness. Similarly, what is the nature of the knowledge-obscuring karma? Non-understanding of the object. What is the nature of the perception-obscuring karma? Non-association with objects worthy of perception. In this way, the sixth case ending is obtained.

Page #415:
---------------------------
-813 $ 736] Chapter Eight
1295  **Karma** (lit. "action"): The experience of pleasure and pain from the object of knowledge (vedya). **Darshan moha** (lit. "delusion of perception"): Lack of faith in the true meaning of reality. **Charitra moha** (lit. "delusion of conduct"): Lack of self-control. **Ayus** (lit. "life span"): The determination of the lifespan. **Nama** (lit. "name"): The naming of a being, such as a hell-being. **Gotra** (lit. "lineage"): The designation of a lineage as high or low. **Antaraya** (lit. "obstacle"): The creation of obstacles, such as through giving. 

This is the characteristic of karma, which is created and becomes manifest. This is its **prakriti** (lit. "nature"). Its **sthiti** (lit. "state") is its non-deviation from its own nature. Just as the sweetness of the milk of goats, cows, and buffaloes does not deviate from its own nature, so too the **jnana avarana** (lit. "veil of knowledge") and other karmas do not deviate from their own nature of preventing the knowledge of reality. 

The **anubhava** (lit. "experience") is the specific taste of these karmas. Just as the milk of goats, cows, and buffaloes has different tastes, such as intense, mild, etc., so too the **karma pudgalas** (lit. "particles of karma") have different experiences of their own inherent qualities. 

**Pradesha** (lit. "region") is the determination of the extent. The **pradesha bandha** (lit. "region bondage") is the determination of the **karma pudgala skandha** (lit. "aggregate of karma particles") in terms of their atoms. The word "vidhi" means "type". These four, **prakriti** and the others, are the types of **bandha** (lit. "bondage"). **Prakriti bandha** and **pradesha bandha** are caused by **yoga** (lit. "effort"), while **sthiti bandha** and **anubhava bandha** are caused by **kashaya** (lit. "passion"). 

The **bandha** is of various types depending on the intensity of **yoga** and **kashaya**. As it is said:

"The living being binds **prakriti** and **pradesha** through **yoga**, and **sthiti** and **anubhava** through **kashaya**.
There is no cause for the **bandha** of **sthiti** in those who are not transformed by **yoga** and **kashaya**, and whose **yoga** and **kashaya** have been destroyed."

**What is the prakriti of darshan avarana karma?** It is the prevention of the illumination of the meaning. **What is the prakriti of the experience of pleasure and pain?** It is the experience of the knowable, both the real and the unreal. **What is the prakriti of darshan moha?** It is the prevention of faith in the true meaning of reality. **What is the prakriti of charitra moha?** It is the state of being uncontrolled. **What is the prakriti of ayus karma?** It is the determination of the lifespan. **What is the prakriti of nama karma?** It is the naming of a being, such as a hell-being. **What is the prakriti of gotra karma?** It is the designation of a lineage as high or low. **What is the prakriti of antaraya karma?** It is the creation of obstacles, such as through giving. 

This is the type of action that is performed, that is, what causes it is its **prakriti**. Its **sthiti** is its non-deviation from its own nature. Just as the sweetness of the milk of goats, cows, and buffaloes does not deviate from its own nature, so too the **jnana avarana** and other karmas do not deviate from their own nature of preventing the knowledge of reality. 

The **anubhava** is the specific taste of these karmas. Just as the milk of goats, cows, and buffaloes has different tastes, such as intense, mild, etc., so too the **karma pudgalas** have different experiences of their own inherent qualities. 

**Pradesha** is the determination of the extent. The **pradesha bandha** is the determination of the **karma pudgala skandha** in terms of their atoms. The word "vidhi" means "type". These four, **prakriti** and the others, are the types of **bandha**. **Prakriti bandha** and **pradesha bandha** are caused by **yoga**, while **sthiti bandha** and **anubhava bandha** are caused by **kashaya**. 

The **bandha** is of various types depending on the intensity of **yoga** and **kashaya**. As it is said:

"The living being binds **prakriti** and **pradesha** through **yoga**, and **sthiti** and **anubhava** through **kashaya**.
There is no cause for the **bandha** of **sthiti** in those who are not transformed by **yoga** and **kashaya**, and whose **yoga** and **kashaya** have been destroyed."

In particular, this chapter describes the four types of **bandha**. Whatever karma is bound by the **samprayayika asrava** (lit. "influx of karma from the past"), we see it in these four forms. What is the nature of the bound karma, how long does it last, how much does it function according to its own nature, and in what form and to what extent does it bind the soul? These are the four types. The main causes of the increase and decrease of these four types of karma are **yoga** and **kashaya**. **Yoga** causes **prakriti bandha** and, to a greater or lesser extent, **pradesha bandha**, while **kashaya** causes **sthiti bandha** and, to a greater or lesser extent, **anubhava bandha**. 1, Mula. 31471 Panchasam. 4,507. Go. K., Ga. 257.

Page #416:
---------------------------
[296] Sarvarthasiddhi
[814 8737$ 737. To show the difference of the first type of karma-bandha, it is said: The first, namely, the karma-bandha of the nature, is of eight types: jnana-avaran, darshan-avaran, vedaniya, mohaniya, ayu, nama, gotra, and antaraya. ||4||
8738. The first karma-bandha of the nature is to be known as eight types: jnana-avaran, etc. That which covers or by which one is covered is called avarna. It is connected with each, such as jnana-avaran and darshan-avaran. That which causes vedana or by which one is vedana is called vedaniya karma. That which deludes or by which one is deluded is called mohaniya karma. That by which one goes to the hell, etc., is called ayu karma. That which humbles the soul or by which the soul is humbled is called nama karma. That by which the jiva is called high or low is called gotra karma. That which makes a difference between the giver and the receiver, i.e., comes in between, is called antaraya karma. Just as the food eaten once undergoes many transformations, such as rasa, blood, etc., in the same way, the pudgalas taken in by one soul-transformation undergo many transformations, such as jnana-avaran, etc. 1. Muhyate iti mu. 2. -Dupyukta- A., Di. 1, Di. 2 Ta., Na.

Page #417:
---------------------------
-816 § 742]
Chapter Eight
[297
8.739. It has been said that there are eight types of *Mūla Prakriti Bandha*. Now, we will discuss *Uttara Prakriti Bandha*. There are five, nine, two, twenty-eight, four, forty-two, two, and five types of *Uttara Prakriti Bandha* respectively. ||5||
8.740. Doubt: Should we consider the second term here, which would imply that there are so many types of the second *Uttara Prakriti Bandha*? Solution: We should not consider the second term, because it is established by the principle of *Pāriśeṣya*. The eight types of *Mūla Prakriti Bandha* have already been mentioned. Therefore, by the principle of *Pāriśeṣya*, these are the types of *Uttara Prakriti Bandha*. The word "types" is related to the numbers five, etc., in order. Thus, there are five types of *Jñānāvaraṇa*, nine types of *Darśanāvaraṇa*, two types of *Vedaniya*, twenty-eight types of *Mohaniya*, four types of *Āyu*, forty-two types of *Nāma*, two types of *Gotra*, and five types of *Antarāya*.
8.741. If *Jñānāvaraṇa* karma is of five types, then we should know about it. Therefore, the next sūtra says:
*Matijñāna*, *Śruta-jñāna*, *Avadhi-jñāna*, *Manaḥ-paryaya-jñāna*, and *Kevala-jñāna* are the five *Jñānāvaraṇa* karmas that cover these five types of knowledge. ||6||
8.742. The types of knowledge like *mati*, etc., have been explained. There are different types of *āvaraṇa* that cover them, therefore, we should know about the five *Uttara Prakriti* of *Jñānāvaraṇa* karma. Doubt: Does an *abhavya* being have the power of *Manaḥ-paryaya-jñāna* and *Kevala-jñāna*? If it does, then it would not be an *abhavya*. If it does not, then the concept of these two *āvaraṇa* karmas would be pointless. Solution: There is no fault because of the *ādeśa* (command) statement. According to the *dravya-ārthika* (substance-oriented) *naya*, an *abhavya* being has the power of *Manaḥ-paryaya-jñāna* and *Kevala-jñāna*, but according to the *paryāya-ārthika* (attribute-oriented) *naya*, it does not have that power. If this is the case, then the distinction between *bhavya* and *abhavya* would not be valid, because both would have the power. However, the presence or absence of power does not

Page #418:
---------------------------
## 298] Sarvarthasiddhi

[8178] The distinction between *bhavya* and *abhavya* is based on the presence or absence of *vyakti*.  Why? Because of the presence or absence of *vyakti* based on *samyagdarshana* and other things.  The one who will have *vyakti* from *samyagdarshana* etc. is *bhavya*. The one who will not have it is *abhavya*. This is like the difference between gold and non-gold stones.

[8743] It has been said that there are five *uttaraprakriti* distinctions of *jnanavarana* karma. Now, the *darshanavarana* karma needs to be explained. Therefore, the next sutra says: "There are nine *darshanavarana* karma: *chakshu*, *achakshu*, *avadhi*, and *kevala* (four types of *darshanavarana*), and *nidra*, *nidranidra*, *prachala*, *prachala-prachala*, and *styanagrudhi* (five types of *nidra* etc.)" ||7||

[8744] This explains the distinction based on the *darshanavarana* of *chakshu*, *achakshu*, *avadhi*, and *kevala*: *chakshudarshanavarana*, *achakshudarshanavarana*, *avhidarshanavarana*, and *kevaladarshanavarana*.  *Mad*, *khed*, *klama*, and *vinoda* are the causes of *swapa* (sleep).  *Nidra* is the absence of these.  **Doubt:** If this is the case, then how can there be a distinction between *bhavya* and *abhavya* because both have the power of *manahparyaya* and *kevalajnana*? **Solution:** The distinction between *bhavya* and *abhavya* is not based on the presence or absence of the power of *manahparyaya* and *kevalajnana*.  **Doubt:** Then on what basis is this distinction made? **Solution:** This distinction is made based on the presence or absence of *vyakti*.  The one who has *vyakti* from *samyagdarshana* etc., like gold and other stones, is *bhavya*. The one who does not have it is *abhavya*.

**Special Note:** Here, five *uttarabheda* of *jnanavarana* karma are mentioned.  Originally, there is only one *jnana*. These five distinctions are obtained due to the characteristics of the *avarana*.  In the *Dhavala* commentary, the example of the sun and the cloud is given to explain this.  It is explained that just as even when the sun is covered by very dense clouds, some rays of the sun still shine through the clouds, similarly, even when *kevalajnanavarana* karma is covered, some knowledge still shines through.  This is what gives rise to the four *uttaravarana* karma.  Thus, there are five *jnanavarana* karma in total, which are found in both *bhavya* and *abhavya*.  In the scriptures, the terms *bhavya* and *abhavya* are given based on the specific type of *bandha*.  These distinctions of the *jiva* should be understood based on this.  There is no other cause for these distinctions.  *Bandha* is of two types: one type of *bandha* is *anadi* and *ananta* (beginningless and endless) in relation to the offspring, and the other type is *anadi* and *santa* (beginningless and finite).  Those *jiva* who have *anadi-ananta* *bandha* of karma are called *abhavya*, and those who have *anadi-santa* *bandha* are considered *bhavya*.  Therefore, even though the power is the same for all *jiva*, there is a difference in its manifestation.  In the scriptures, the example of gold and blind stones is given to explain this distinction.  This example also supports the above statement.  Thus, it has been explained why there are five distinctions of *jnanavarana* karma.

[8743] The *uttaraprakriti* distinctions of *jnanavarana* karma have been explained. Now, the *darshanavarana* karma needs to be explained. Therefore, the next sutra says: "There are nine *darshanavarana* karma: *chakshu*, *achakshu*, *avadhi*, and *kevala* (four types of *darshanavarana*), and *nidra*, *nidranidra*, *prachala*, *prachala-prachala*, and *styanagrudhi* (five types of *nidra* etc.)" ||7||

[8744] This explains the distinction based on the *darshanavarana* of *chakshu*, *achakshu*, *avadhi*, and *kevala*: *chakshudarshanavarana*, *achakshudarshanavarana*, *avhidarshanavarana*, and *kevaladarshanavarana*.  *Mad*, *khed*, *klama*, and *vinoda* are the causes of *swapa* (sleep).  *Nidra* is the absence of these.

Page #419:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

[299]  **Nidra-nidra** is the continuous flow of **vritti** (mental activity). **Prachala** is the action that moves the soul, caused by sorrow, fatigue, intoxication, etc., and is indicated by the movement of the eyes and limbs even in a seated being. **Prachala-prachala** is the repeated occurrence of **prachala**. **Styanagridhi** is the special type of **virya** (energy) that manifests in dreams.  Since the verb "**styayate**" has multiple meanings, the meaning of "dream" is taken here. **Gridhi** means "shining." The meaning of **Styanagridhi** is derived from the root "**styane**" (to be dull) and "**gaddhayati**" (to shine) in dreams.  It means that the soul performs many violent actions due to the rise of **Styanagridhi**. Here, the term **darshanavaran** (veil of perception) is connected with **nidra** (sleep) and other terms through **samanaadhikarannya** (common ground). For example, **nidra-darshanavaran**, **nidra-nidra-darshanavaran**, etc.

8745. To explain the **uttaraprakriti** (subsequent nature) of the third **prakriti** (nature), it is said:
**Sadvedya** and **Asavedya** are the two **vedaniya** (objects of experience). || 8 ||

8746. **Sadvedya** is that which, upon its rise, leads to the attainment of physical and mental happiness in the paths of gods, etc. **Sadvedya** is the name for a good object of experience. **Asavedya** is that which results in various kinds of suffering. **Asavedya** is the name for a bad object of experience.

**Special Note:** Here, two types of **vedaniya** karma (karma that produces experience) are mentioned. This is **jiva-vipaki** karma (karma that ripens in the soul). The **sat** (good) and **asat** (bad) states of the soul are caused by its rise. The external material objects are called its fruits, but this is a metaphorical statement. In reality, external material objects are the cause of the rise of **sat** and **asat**. Therefore, the attainment of external material objects can be considered the fruit of **vedaniya** karma metaphorically. The cause of the attainment of external material objects in the paths of gods, hell, and the realms of enjoyment is the **leshya** (subtle karmic impressions) of those respective paths. In the realm of karma, there are many causes for the attainment of external material objects. Thus, one should understand the two types of **vedaniya** karma and their functions.

Page #420:
---------------------------
[300] Sarvarthasiddhi.
[819 8 747$ 747. To show the alternatives of the fourth basic nature, the following sutra is stated: Darshanamohaniya, Charitramohaniya, Akashaya Vedaniya, and Kashaya Vedaniya have three, two, nine, and sixteen divisions respectively. Samyaktvam, Mithyatvam, and Tadubhayam are the three Darshanamohaniya. Akashaya Vedaniya and Kashaya Vedaniya are the two Charitramohaniya. Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Strived, Puved, and Napusakaved are the nine Akashaya Vedaniya. And Anantanubandhi, Apratyakhyan, Pratyakhyan, and Sanjwalan, each with the divisions of Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha, are the sixteen Kashaya Vedaniya. ||9|| 8748. Darshan etc. are four, and Trya etc. are also four. There, their connection is in order, as follows: Darshanamohaniya is of three types, Charitramohaniya is of two types, Akashaya Vedaniya is of nine types, and Kashaya Vedaniya is of sixteen types.
8749. Of these, the three divisions of Darshanamohaniya are Samyaktvam, Mithyatvam, and Tadubhayam. It is one in terms of bondage, but three in terms of good deeds. Of these three, the one whose rise makes the being turn away from the path ordained by the omniscient, who is not eager to have faith in the true meaning, who is incapable of considering what is beneficial and harmful, and who is thus a Mithyadristi, is Mithyatvam Darshanamohaniya. The same Mithyatvam, when it stops its own sap (vipak) due to the cause of auspicious results, and remains indifferent, not stopping the faith of the soul, is Samyaktvam. The person who experiences this is called a Samyagdristi. The same Mithyatvam, due to a special cleansing, becomes half-pure in sap, like a Kodra with diminished strength, and is called Tadubhayam. Its other name is Samyamithyatvam. Its rise results in a dualistic result, like the mixed result obtained from the use of Kodra and rice by one with diminished strength.
8747. Now, to show the alternatives of the fourth basic nature, the following sutra is stated: Darshanamohaniya, Charitramohaniya, Akashaya Vedaniya, and Kashaya Vedaniya have three, two, nine, and sixteen divisions respectively. Samyaktvam, Mithyatvam, and Tadubhayam are the three Darshanamohaniya. Akashaya Vedaniya and Kashaya Vedaniya are the two Charitramohaniya. Hasya, Rati, Arati, Shoka, Bhaya, Jugupsa, Strived, Puved, and Napusakaved are the nine Akashaya Vedaniya. And Anantanubandhi, Apratyakhyan, Pratyakhyan, and Sanjwalan, each with the divisions of Krodha, Mana, Maya, and Lobha, are the sixteen Kashaya Vedaniya. ||9|| 8748. Darshan etc. are four, and Trya etc. are also four. There, their connection is in order, as follows: Darshanamohaniya is of three types, Charitramohaniya is of two types, Akashaya Vedaniya is of nine types, and Kashaya Vedaniya is of sixteen types.
8749. Of these, the three divisions of Darshanamohaniya are Samyaktvam, Mithyatvam, and Tadubhayam. It is one in terms of bondage, but three in terms of good deeds. Of these three, the one whose rise makes the being turn away from the path ordained by the omniscient, who is not eager to have faith in the true meaning, who is incapable of considering what is beneficial and harmful, and who is thus a Mithyadristi, is Mithyatvam Darshanamohaniya. The same Mithyatvam, when it stops its own sap (vipak) due to the cause of auspicious results, and remains indifferent, not stopping the faith of the soul, is Samyaktvam. The person who experiences this is called a Samyagdristi. The same Mithyatvam, due to a special cleansing, becomes half-pure in sap, like a Kodra with diminished strength, and is called Tadubhayam. Its other name is Samyamithyatvam. Its rise results in a dualistic result, like the mixed result obtained from the use of Kodra and rice by one with diminished strength.
1.  Trya etc. are also four. There, Mu., Ta., Na. 2.  Kodravopayo M.

Page #421:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

**8750.  **There are two types of *charitramohaniya* (karma that hinders right conduct): *akashaya* (non-poisonous) and *kashaya* (poisonous).  The term *akashaya* is used here for *ishadkashaya* (slightly poisonous) because the word *na* (not) is used in the sense of *ishada* (slightly). There are nine types of *akashaya* *vedaniya* (karma that produces non-poisonous experiences), due to the difference in their nature, such as *hasya* (laughter). 

* *Hasya* is that which arises from laughter.
* *Rati* is that which arises from desire for things like country, etc.
* *Arati* is the opposite of *rati*.
* *Shoka* is that which arises from sorrow.
* *Bhaya* is that which arises from fear.
* *Jugupsa* is that which arises from the suppression of one's own faults and the exposure of others' faults.
* *Striveda* is that which arises from the acceptance of feminine qualities.
* *Puveda* is that which arises from the acceptance of masculine qualities.
* *Napusakaved* is that which arises from the acceptance of neuter qualities.

**8751.** There are sixteen types of *kashaya* *vedaniya* (karma that produces poisonous experiences), due to the difference in their nature, such as *anantaanubandhi* (infinitely connected). These *kashayas* are: *krodha* (anger), *mana* (pride), *maya* (deceit), and *lobha* (greed). They have four stages: *anantaanubandhi*, *apratyakhyanavarna*, *pratyakhyanavarna*, and *sanjwalana*.

* *Ananta* (infinite) *samsara* (cycle of birth and death) is caused by *mithyadarshana* (false belief), which is therefore called *ananta*. The *kashayas* that are connected to this *ananta* are called *anantaanubandhi* *krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, and *lobha*.
* *Apratyakhyanavarna* *krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, and *lobha* are those that cover the rejection of *desh* (territory) and prevent the individual from even slightly performing *virati* (restraint) and *samyama* (control), which are also known as *samyama-asamyama*.
* *Pratyakhyanavarna* *krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, and *lobha* are those that cover the complete rejection of *samyama* and prevent the individual from performing complete *virati*.
* *Sanjwalana* *krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, and *lobha* are those that burn brightly together with *samyama* or cause *samyama* to burn brightly in their presence.

These sixteen *kashayas* are collectively called *kashaya* *vedaniya*.

**Note:** *Charitramohaniya* karma has two types: *darshanamohaniya* and *charitramohaniya*. *Darshanamohaniya* karma hinders the attainment of right belief, while *charitramohaniya* karma hinders the attainment of right conduct.

Page #422:
---------------------------
## 302]
There are three main types of **mohaniya** (that which obscures). **Mithyatva** (false belief) is the opposite of **samyag darshan** (right belief). The living being has been holding **mithyatva** since beginningless time. It is only when it receives the appropriate **dravya** (substance) and other causes that it develops **samyag darshan**. This **samyag darshan** first arises only after the **mithyatva** karma (action) that is its opposite is subdued. Generally, this happens when the time remaining for the living being to stay in the world is equal to the time it takes for half a **pudgala** (atom) to change. It does not happen before that. There is no rule that it must happen when that much time remains. It can happen even when less time remains. This is called **prathamopaśama samyag darshan** (the first subduing of right belief). **Samyag darshan** means right belief. According to Jainism, the belief that upholds the principle of individual freedom and leads to self-realization is considered right belief. When this **samyag darshan** arises, the karma that is its opposite is divided into three parts. These are called **mithyatva**, **samyag mithyatva**, and **samyak prakriti mithyatva**. The first one continues to do its own work. The second and third work according to their names. That is, **samyag mithyatva** is the cause for the mixed result, and **samyak prakriti mithyatva** is the cause for the right belief result to be flawed. In this way, one **mithyatva** karma, having received the cause for right belief, is divided into three parts. Therefore, in relation to bondage, it is considered to be one, but in relation to existence, it is considered to be of three types.

The second type of **mohaniya** is **charitra mohaniya** (that which obscures conduct). We have already explained that the belief that upholds the principle of individual freedom is **samyag darshan**. Therefore, the conduct that is in accordance with this belief can be considered **sadachar** (good conduct), and nothing else. This is why, according to Jainism, conduct that is in accordance with self-reliance is called **sadachar**. The other name for this **sadachar** is **sacharitra** (true conduct). The karma that hinders the attainment of this **sacharitra** is called **charitra mohaniya** in the scriptures. It has two main types: **kṣayavedaniya** (that which causes destruction) and **akṣayavedaniya** (that which does not cause destruction). **Akṣayavedaniya** does not hinder the attainment of **samyak charitra** (right conduct) because it is **deshghati karma** (karma that destroys the body). **Kṣayavedaniya** has four types. Among them, **ananta anubandhi** (infinitely connected) **krodha** (anger), **mana** (pride), **maya** (deceit), and **lobha** (greed) do not allow the principle of self-reliance, which is in accordance with individual freedom, to be established in life. This is why they are called **ananta** (infinite), meaning the cause of the cycle of birth and death. There is an inseparable connection between individual freedom and self-reliance. When there is faith in individual freedom in life, the importance of self-reliance is automatically understood. It is not possible for someone to have faith in individual freedom in their life but still be inclined towards making their life dependent on others. This is why the **ananta anubandhi** quartet is considered to be the cause of the infinite cycle of birth and death.

In this way, when there is a desire for individual freedom and self-reliance in accordance with it in life, the individual strives to become completely self-reliant. However, they cannot abandon all their past dependencies at once. Therefore, as they become internally purified, they become more and more self-reliant. Sometimes, it also happens that even when there is complete faith in individual freedom and the path of self-reliance in a person's life, they find themselves unable to put it into practice. This is considered to be due to inner weakness in life, and **apratyakhyanavaran** (unrejected covering) **krodha**, **mana**, **maya**, and **lobha** are the causes for maintaining this state. This is why these **kṣayās** (passions) are called the hinderers of partial self-reliance. And **pratyakhyanavaran** **krodha**, **mana**, **maya**, and **lobha** are considered to be the hinderers of complete self-reliance. **Sanjvalan** (burning) **krodha**, **mana**, **maya**, and **lobha** do make the practice of self-reliance flawed, but they are not able to hinder it. In this way, we have briefly considered the function of **mohaniya** and its sub-types.

Page #423:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

**752.**  The author, after explaining the **Mohaniya** karma, now explains the **Ayush** karma, which determines the nature of the future birth, by saying:

**Narka-ayush, Tiryancha-ayush, Manusha-ayush, and Deva-ayush are the four types of Ayush.** ||10||

**753.** The **Ayush** karma is named according to the type of birth it leads to. For example, the **Narka-ayush** leads to birth in hell, **Tiryancha-ayush** leads to birth in the animal realm, **Manusha-ayush** leads to birth as a human, and **Deva-ayush** leads to birth in the heavenly realms. In hell, where there is intense cold and heat, the **Narka-ayush** is responsible for a long life. Similarly, the other types of **Ayush** are responsible for the duration of life in their respective realms.

**754.**  Having explained the four types of **Ayush**, the author now explains the **Nama-karma**, which determines the nature of the future birth, by saying:

**Gati, Jati, Sharira, Ango-upanga, Nirman, Bandhan, Sanghata, Sansthan, Sanhanan, Sparsha, Rasa, Gandha, Varna, Anupurvya, Aguru-laghu, Upghāt, Parghāt, Ātap, Udyot, Ucchvās, Viha-yoga-gati, and the corresponding opposite qualities, namely, ordinary body and each body, stationary and mobile, unfortunate and fortunate, bad voice and good voice, inauspicious and auspicious, coarse and subtle, insufficient and sufficient, unstable and stable, unworthy and worthy, bad fame and good fame, and Tirthankara-hood, are the forty-two types of Nama-karma.** ||11||

**8755.** The **Gati** is the karma that determines the realm of birth. There are four types of **Gati**: **Narka-gati** (hell), **Tiryancha-gati** (animal realm), **Manusha-gati** (human realm), and **Deva-gati** (heavenly realms). The **Narka-gati** karma is responsible for the birth of a soul in hell. Similarly, the other types of **Gati** karma are responsible for the birth of a soul in their respective realms.

Page #424:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**304 j**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
**I**

[8!11 § 755 Name. It is of five types - Ekaindriya jati nama karma, Dviindriya jati nama karma, Triindriya jati nama karma, Chaturindriya jati nama karma and Panchendriya jati nama karma. That which is called Ekaindriya from its arising is Ekaindriya jati nama karma. Similarly, it should be applied to the rest. That which is called Sharira from its arising is Sharira nama karma. It is of five types - Audarik sharira nama karma, Vaikriyik sharira nama karma, Aharak sharira nama karma, Taijas sharira nama karma and Karman sharira nama karma. Their specialities have been explained before. That which is called Angopaang from its arising is Angopaang nama karma. It is of three types - Audarik sharira angopaang nama karma, Vaikriyik sharira angopaang nama karma and Aharak sharira angopaang nama karma. That which is called Nirman from its cause is Nirman nama karma. It is of two types - Sthan nirman and Praman nirman. It, depending on the arising of Jati nama karma, creates the place and size of the eyes etc. The meaning of the word Nirman is derived from its etymology - 'Nirmiyate aneti nirmanam'. That by which creation is done is called Nirman. That which is called Bandhan from its arising is Bandhan nama karma. It is the cause of the mutual combination of the pudgals obtained from the arising of Sharira nama karma. That which is called Sanghat from its arising is Sanghat nama karma. It is the cause of the unity of the Audarik etc. bodies by their entering into each other's regions without any gaps. That which is called Sansthan from its arising is Sansthan nama karma. It is the cause of the formation of the shape of the Audarik etc. bodies. It is divided into six types - Samachaturasra sansthan nama karma, Nyagrodha parimandal sansthan nama karma, Swati sansthan nama karma, Kubja sansthan nama karma, Vaman sansthan nama karma and Hund sansthan nama karma. That which is called Sanhanan from its arising is Sanhanan nama karma. It is the cause of the special binding of the bones. It is of six types - Vantrarshabhanaracha sanhanan nama karma, Vajranaracha sanhanan nama karma, Naracha sanhanan nama karma, Ardhanaracha sanhanan nama karma, Kiilikasanhanan nama karma and Asamprapta1. Kiilitasan - Bhu. Kiilas  Di. 2 । 2.   Praptaasrupa - A., Di. 1, Di. 2 । 

**Translation:**

**304 j**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
**I**

[8!11 § 755 Name. It is of five types - Ekaindriya Jati Nama Karma, Dviindriya Jati Nama Karma, Triindriya Jati Nama Karma, Chaturindriya Jati Nama Karma and Panchendriya Jati Nama Karma. That which is called Ekaindriya from its arising is Ekaindriya Jati Nama Karma. Similarly, it should be applied to the rest. That which is called Sharira from its arising is Sharira Nama Karma. It is of five types - Audarik Sharira Nama Karma, Vaikriyik Sharira Nama Karma, Aharak Sharira Nama Karma, Taijas Sharira Nama Karma and Karman Sharira Nama Karma. Their specialities have been explained before. That which is called Angopaang from its arising is Angopaang Nama Karma. It is of three types - Audarik Sharira Angopaang Nama Karma, Vaikriyik Sharira Angopaang Nama Karma and Aharak Sharira Angopaang Nama Karma. That which is called Nirman from its cause is Nirman Nama Karma. It is of two types - Sthan Nirman and Praman Nirman. It, depending on the arising of Jati Nama Karma, creates the place and size of the eyes etc. The meaning of the word Nirman is derived from its etymology - 'Nirmiyate aneti nirmanam'. That by which creation is done is called Nirman. That which is called Bandhan from its arising is Bandhan Nama Karma. It is the cause of the mutual combination of the pudgals obtained from the arising of Sharira Nama Karma. That which is called Sanghat from its arising is Sanghat Nama Karma. It is the cause of the unity of the Audarik etc. bodies by their entering into each other's regions without any gaps. That which is called Sansthan from its arising is Sansthan Nama Karma. It is the cause of the formation of the shape of the Audarik etc. bodies. It is divided into six types - Samachaturasra Sansthan Nama Karma, Nyagrodha Parimandal Sansthan Nama Karma, Swati Sansthan Nama Karma, Kubja Sansthan Nama Karma, Vaman Sansthan Nama Karma and Hund Sansthan Nama Karma. That which is called Sanhanan from its arising is Sanhanan Nama Karma. It is the cause of the special binding of the bones. It is of six types - Vantrarshabhanaracha Sanhanan Nama Karma, Vajranaracha Sanhanan Nama Karma, Naracha Sanhanan Nama Karma, Ardhanaracha Sanhanan Nama Karma, Kiilikasanhanan Nama Karma and Asamprapta1. Kiilitasan - Bhu. Kiilas  Di. 2 । 2.   Praptaasrupa - A., Di. 1, Di. 2 ।

Page #425:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

- **Rasa Karma:**  The karma that causes a difference in taste. There are five types: 
    - Tikta Karma (Bitter)
    - Katu Karma (Pungent)
    - Kashaya Karma (Astringent)
    - Amla Karma (Sour)
    - Madhura Karma (Sweet)

- **Gandha Karma:** The karma that causes a difference in smell. There are two types:
    - Surabhi Gandha Karma (Pleasant Smell)
    - Asurbhi Gandha Karma (Unpleasant Smell)

- **Varna Karma:** The karma that causes a difference in color. There are five types:
    - Krishna Varna Karma (Black)
    - Nila Varna Karma (Blue)
    - Rakta Varna Karma (Red)
    - Haridra Varna Karma (Yellow)
    - Shukla Varna Karma (White)

- **Anupurvya Karma:** The karma that causes the continuation of the previous body's form. There are four types:
    - Naraka Gati Prayogya Anupurvya Karma (Karma leading to hell)
    - Tiryanch Gati Prayogya Anupurvya Karma (Karma leading to animal realm)
    - Manushya Gati Prayogya Anupurvya Karma (Karma leading to human realm)
    - Deva Gati Prayogya Anupurvya Karma (Karma leading to heavenly realm)

- **Agurulaghu Karma:** The karma that causes the body to neither fall down due to heaviness nor rise up due to lightness.

- **Upadhata Karma:** The karma that causes harm due to self-inflicted bondage, falling into a desert, etc.

- **Paradhata Karma:** The karma that causes harm due to external factors like weapons.

- **Atap Karma:** The karma that causes heat in the body. It is present in the sun.

- **Udyota Karma:** The karma that causes light in the body. It is present in the moon, stars, etc.

- **Uchchvas Karma:** The karma that causes breathing.

- **Vihayoga Gati Karma:** The karma that causes movement in the sky. There are two types:
    - Prashsta Vihayoga Gati Karma (Good movement)
    - Aprashsta Vihayoga Gati Karma (Bad movement)

- **Pratyek Sharira Karma:** The karma that creates a body for the enjoyment of a single soul.

- **Sadharana Sharira Karma:** The karma that creates a body for the enjoyment of many souls.

- **Tras Karma:** The karma that causes birth in the realm of beings with two or more senses.

- **Sthavar Karma:** The karma that causes birth in the realm of beings with one sense.

- **Sparsha Karma:** The karma that causes the development of the sense of touch. There are eight types:
    - Karkasha Karma (Rough)
    - Madhu Karma (Soft)
    - Guru Karma (Heavy)
    - Laghu Karma (Light)
    - Snigdha Karma (Oily)
    - Rooksha Karma (Dry)
    - Shita Karma (Cold)
    - Ushna Karma (Hot)

Page #426:
---------------------------
[306] Sarvarthasiddhi
[81118755] That which is the cause of the body of a stationary being is called *sthāvara* karma. That which is the cause of happiness from its arising is called *subhaga* karma. That which is the cause of unhappiness even though it is associated with qualities like form, etc., from its arising is called *durbhaga* karma. That which is the cause of the production of a pleasing voice is called *susvara* karma. The opposite of this is *duhsvara* karma. That which is the cause of being pleasing from its arising is called *subha* karma. The opposite of this is *asubha* karma. That which is the cause of a subtle body is called *sukshma* karma. That which is the cause of a body that is a hindrance to others is called *bādhara* karma. That which is the cause of the fulfillment of needs like food, etc., from its arising is called *paryāpti* karma. It is of six types: *āhāra-paryāpti* karma, *śarīra-paryāpti* karma, *indriya-paryāpti* karma, *prāṇāpāna-paryāpti* karma, *bhāṣā-paryāpti* karma, and *manaḥ-paryāpti* karma. That which is the cause of the absence of these six types of fulfillments is called *aparyāpti* karma. That which is the cause of stability is called *sthira* karma. The opposite of this is *asthira* karma. That which is the cause of a body that is endowed with radiance is called *ādeya* karma. That which is the cause of a body that is devoid of radiance is called *anādeya* karma. That which is the cause of the propagation of virtuous qualities is called *yaśaḥ-kīrti* karma. The opposite of this is *ayaśaḥ-kīrti* karma. That which is the cause of becoming an Arhant is called *tīrthakara* karma. 

**Special Note:** Here, the functions of the *nāma* karmas in their subsequent states are discussed. There are eight *mūla* karmas. Out of these, seven are considered *jīva-vipāki*. *Nāma* karma is both *jīva-vipāki* and *pudgala-vipāki*. Those karmas whose result is in the *jīva* are *jīva-vipāki*, and those whose result is in the *pudgala* like the body, etc., are *pudgala-vipāki*. This is their literal meaning. Keeping this in mind, it is necessary to discuss their meaning in detail. Generally, all karmas bind by becoming the cause of the *jīva's* delusion, attachment, aversion, etc., therefore their result is in the *jīva* itself. That is, the *jīva* acquires the respective abilities from the arising of these karmas. Still, what is the reason for making distinctions like *jīva-vipāki*, *pudgala-vipāki*, *kṣetra-vipāki*, and *bhava-vipāki*? This is what we need to see here. The *jīva's* samsara is due to the union of the *jīva* and *pudgala*. While residing there, he takes birth in various *gatis*, dies, and assumes various bodies according to them. This cannot happen without a cause, therefore various types of karmas are considered to be the cause of their attainment. Those which are called *bhava-vipāki* in the scriptures are called by that name because they are caused by a particular state in that particular *paryāya*. Those which are called *kṣetra-vipāki* maintain the *jīva's* form during the interval when he is going from one *gati* to another. Those which are called *pudgala-vipāki* are helpful in the attainment of various types of bodies and sense organs capable of enjoyment, and those which are called *jīva-vipāki* help in the *jīva's* various types of *pariṇāmas* and his various states.

Page #427:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

**[307 $ 756]** The distinction of the after-effects of the Name-Karma has been explained. Now, the distinction of the after-effects of the Gotra-Karma is explained, which is the cause of the birth in high and low families. **[12]**

**[8757]** Gotra-Karma is of two types: high Gotra and low Gotra. The Gotra whose arising results in birth in families that are revered by the world is called high Gotra. The Gotra whose arising results in birth in families that are despised is called low Gotra. 

**[1]** The cause of birth in a revered family is high Gotra. **[2]** The cause of birth in a despised family is low Gotra.

Page #428:
---------------------------
[8113 § 758
**308]**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
$ 758. To indicate the Uttaraprakriti of the eighth Karma-prakriti, it is said:
**Danalābhabhogopabhoga vīryāṇām ||13||**
8759. Here, the distinction is made in relation to Antarayas: Antaray of Dana, Antaray of Labha, etc. This designation is given because they are the cause of obstruction to the results of Dana, etc. One who desires to give, but does not give; one who desires to obtain, but does not obtain; one who desires to enjoy, but cannot enjoy; one who desires to consume, but cannot consume; and one who desires to be enthusiastic, but cannot be enthusiastic – these are the five types of Antarayas.
**Special Meaning:** These five are the attainments of a Jiva: Dana, Labha, Bhoga, Upabhoga, and Virya. The Antarayakarma is the obstructive cause in the manifestation of these five Jiva-states. This is the meaning of the above statement. Sometimes, the fruit of the destruction and pacification of Antarayakarma is said to be the attainment of external material things, but that is a remedial statement. In reality, it is about external material things. To say that their attainment is the fruit of the destruction and pacification of the Jiva-vipaki Antarayakarma is a remedial statement. One should understand here that the feeling of "mine" in others is the fruit of Mithyatva, and its acceptance is the fruit of Kashaya.
8760. The types of Prakriti-bandha have been stated. Now, the types of Sthiti-bandha should be stated. That Sthiti is of two types: Utkrishta Sthiti and Jaghanya Sthiti. To indicate those Karma-prakritis whose Utkrishta Sthiti is the same, it is said:

Page #429:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight: The Supreme State of the Three Avaranas and Antarayakarma is Thirty Koti Koti Sagaropama

**14.** The term "Aditah" is used in the sutra to indicate that the three Avaranas should not be taken at the beginning, middle, or end. The term "Antarayasya" refers to the Antarayakarma, which is distinct from the three Avaranas. The quantity "Sagaropama" has been previously explained. Koti Koti means Koti of Kotis. The word "Para" signifies supreme. This means that the supreme state of the three Avaranas (Jnana Avarana, Darsana Avarana, and Vedaniya) and Antarayakarma is thirty Koti Koti Sagaropama. This supreme state is attained by a Mithyadristi, Sanjni, Panchendriya, and Paryapta Jiva. For other Jivas, it should be understood according to their respective Agamas.

**15.** The supreme state of Mohaniya is seventy Koti Koti Sagaropama.

**16.** The supreme state of Nama and Gotra is twenty Koti Koti Sagaropama.

Page #430:
---------------------------
[310] Sarvarthasiddhi
[81178765765. 'Sagaropamakotikotiyah para sthitih' iti anuvartate. Iyam apyutkrista sthiti mithyadristi sanjnipanceindriyaparyaptakasya. Itaresham yathagamanavayovya. 8766. Athayushah kotkrista sthitiryuchyate
Trashtri-shat-sagaropamanyayushah ||17|| 767. Punah 'sagaropama' grahanam kotikotiinivrityartham. 'Para sthitih' ity anuvartate. Iyam api purvoktasyaive. Seshanam agamato'vaseya.
6768. Uktotkrista sthitih. Idanon jagganya sthitirvaktavya. Tatra samanajagganya sthitih pancha prakritir avasthapy tisrunam jagganya sthitipratipattyarth sutradvayam upanyasyate ladhvartham 
Apara dvadasa muhurta vedaniyasya ||18|| 8769. Apara jagganya ity arthah. Vedaniyasya dvadasa muhurtah.
Namagotrayor astau ||19|| 8770. 'Muhurtah' ity anuvartate. 'Apara sthitih' iti cha. 8771. Avasthapitprakritikjagganya sthitipratipadanarthamaha
8765. 'Sagaropamakotikotiyah para sthitih' pada ki anuvritti hoti hai. Yah bhi utkrista sthiti mithyadristi sanjnee panchendriya paryaptak jeev ke janna chahiye. Itar jeevon ke agam ke anusar janna chahiye.
8766. Ab aayu karma ko utkrista sthiti kya hai yah batlane ke liye aage ka sutra kahte hain
Aayu ki utkrista sthiti tetis sagaropama hai ||17||
8767. Is sutra mein punah 'sagaropama' pada ka grahan kotakoti pada ki nivritti ke liye diya hai. Yahan 'para sthitih' pada ki anuvritti hoti hai. Yah bhi purvokt jeev ke hoti hai. Sesha jeevon ke agam se janna chahiye.
Vishesharth-Yahan tika mein aayukarma ka utkrista sthitibandh ka swami mithyadristi kaha hai. So yah is abhipray se kaha hai ki mithyadristi sanjnee panchendriya paryaptak jeev bhi narakayu bandh ke yogya utkrista sanklesh parinamon ke hone par narakayu ka utkrista sthitibandh karta hai. Iska yah abhipray nahin ki any gunasthan vale ke aayukarma ka utkrista sthitibandh nahin hota. Devayu ka tetis sagaropama utkrista sthitibandh sakal sanayam ke dhari samyagdristi ke hi hota hai. Par tikakar ne yahan uske kahne ki vivaksha nahin ki.
6768. Utkrista sthiti kahi. Ab jagganya sthiti kahni chahiye. Usme saman jagganya sthiti wali panch prakritiyon ko sthagit karke thode mein kahne ke abhipray se tin prakritiyon ki jagganya sthiti ka gyan karane ke liye do sutra kahte hain
Vedaniya ko jagganya sthiti barah muhurt hai ||18|| 8769. Apara arthath jagganya. Yah vedaniya ki barah muhurt hai. Naam aur gotra ki jagganya sthiti aath muhurt hai ||19|| 8770. Yahan 'muhurtah' pada ki anuvritti hoti hai aur 'apara sthitih' pada ki bhi.
8771. Ab sthagit ki gayi prakritiyon ki jagganya sthiti ka kathn karne ke liye aage ka sutra kahte hain

Page #431:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight: The Innermost Moment of the Remaining Karmas

**8772.** The innermost moment of the remaining five karmas is as follows: The innermost moment of knowledge-obscuring karma is in the subtle-pervasive state (sūkṣma-sāmprāya) of the guṇasthāna; the innermost moment of perception-obscuring karma is in the non-cessation-pervasive state (anivṛtti-bādarasa-sāmprāya) of the guṇasthāna; and the innermost moment of the karma of lifespan is in the lifespan of animals and humans that is measured in years.

**8773.** Both types of states have been described. Now, the question arises: What is the nature of the experience of knowledge-obscuring karma and the other karmas?

**8774.** The experience is called **vipaka**, which means the ripening of the karma. This ripening can be specific or diverse. It is specific due to the difference in the intensity of the passions (kaṣāya) and the flow of the karmic matter (āsrava) as described earlier. Or, it can be diverse due to the difference in the nature of the substance (dravya), the field (kṣetra), the time (kāla), the state of being (bhava), and the cause (nimitta) that give rise to the various forms of ripening. This ripening is called **anubhava**. The experience of the auspicious karmas is excellent due to the predominance of auspicious results, and the experience of the inauspicious karmas is inferior. Similarly, the experience of the inauspicious karmas is excellent due to the predominance of inauspicious results, and the experience of the auspicious karmas is inferior. This experience, obtained through the influence of the karmas, manifests in two ways: through one's own mouth (svamukha) and through the mouth of another (paramukha). All the root karmas experience only through one's own mouth. The subsequent karmas, which are of the same type, experience through the mouth of another as well, except for the karmas of lifespan, perception-obscuring karma, and conduct-obscuring karma. For example, the karma of hellish lifespan does not ripen through the mouth of the lifespan of animals or humans. Similarly, perception-obscuring karma does not ripen through the mouth of conduct-obscuring karma, and vice versa.

**8775.** **Doubt:** The experience is the ripening of the various types of karmas accumulated in the past. But we do not understand...

Page #432:
---------------------------
3121 Sarvarthasiddhi
[8122 8776 Is this *praसंख्यात* or *apraसंख्यात*? It is said that it is *praसंख्यात* because it is experienced. Why? Because
it is like its name. ||220 8776. The result of *jnanaavaran* is the absence of knowledge, and the result of *darshanavaran* is the obstruction of the power of perception. Thus, from the indication of the meaningful names of all the *karma* natures, with their sub-categories, the knowledge of their experience arises.
8777. It is said, if the result is accepted as experience, then does the experienced *karma* remain like an ornament, or does it fall away like the essence that has been drunk? To this, it is said,
Therefore, there is *nirjara*. ||23|| 8778. Just as the waste of rice etc. is eliminated and becomes *nirjina*, similarly, by giving good and bad results to the soul, the destruction of the previously attained state, due to the absence of that state, is the *nirjara* of *karma*. It is of two types: *vipakaja* and *avipakaja*. In that, for the being who has wandered for a long time in the great ocean of *samsara*, consisting of four *gatis* and many types of *jati*, when the time for the ripening of good and bad *karma* arrives, and the stream of the *anubhavodayavali* enters, the cessation of the *karma* after giving its result is *vipakaja nirjara*. The *karma* whose time for ripening has not yet arrived, but which is experienced by being forcibly brought into the *anubhavodayavali* by the power of a particular *aupakramika kriya*, like the ripening of mangoes and jackfruit, is *avipakaja nirjara*. The word 'c' indicates the collection of other causes. 'By *tapas* there is also *nirjara*'. This will be said later, therefore, the purpose of giving the word 'c' is that *nirjara* occurs in the way mentioned earlier, and also in other ways. 
Doubt: Here, the mention of *nirjara* is in 1. *nasya phalam mu*. 2. *bhutam kima -mu*. 3. *ganite a*, *di. 1*, *di. 2*.
Jain Education International

Page #433:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

[313c] It will be said that the meaning of the sutra is applied here, as it is said "other than that". Why is the mention of "nirjara" made here? Shouldn't it be mentioned after "samvara", as per the purpose? 

**Solution:** The mention of "nirjara" is made here for brevity. If the text were to be given after "samvara", then "vipako'nubhavaḥ" would have to be translated again.

"Anubhava", "anubhaga", and "phaladanashakti" all have the same meaning. At the time of the binding of karma, the karma acquires a "phaladanashakti" (fruit-giving power) according to its nature. For example, "jnanavaran" has the nature of covering knowledge, therefore it acquires a "phaladanashakti" accordingly. The meaning of "prakriti" is nature, and the meaning of "anubhava" is to experience according to that nature. 

Generally, it can be said here that if this is the meaning of "prakriti" and "anubhava", then it is not appropriate to consider them separately, because it is naturally proven that the experience will be according to the nature of the karma. Therefore, "prakritibandha" and "anubhavabandha" are not two independent entities, but "anubhavabandha" is included in "prakritibandha".

If it is said that the nature of karma, in the form of "jnanavaran" etc., is due to the "phaladanashakti", therefore "anubhavabandha" cannot be included in "prakritibandha", then the solution is this: While the cause of "prakritibandha" is "yoga", and the cause of "anubhavabandha" is "hinaadhikta" (inferiority/superiority) due to "kashaya", then how can it be considered that the nature of karma is formed due to "phaladanashakti"? Even if we assume this for a while, the question still remains: Why are "prakritibandha" and "anubhavabandha" considered separately, and why are "yoga" and "kashaya" given as two independent causes for their separate consideration?

The sutrakar has described four types of binding, and has also called "vipak" (karma experience) as "anubhava", and has described it according to its nature. This proves that they are not actually two, but what is called "prakriti" at the time of binding, is called "anubhava" at the time of its manifestation?

**Solution:** At the time of karma binding, the division of karma in various forms is due to "yoga", and the acquisition of "hinaadhik" (inferior/superior) "phaladanashakti" in the acquired karma is due to "kashaya", therefore these two are considered independent.

Although it is true that without power, the nature of any karma cannot be formed. By saying "independent prakriti", the knowledge of its power is already implied. However, there is a limit to such power. The knowledge of the power that is acquired beyond that limit is the work of "anubhagabandha".

For example, in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth "gunasthanas", there is "prakritibandha" of "satavedaniya", and this "prakritibandha" is for a fixed limit of "anubhaga". However, "anubhagabandha" is prohibited here. The reason for this is that the "anubhaga" that was acquired in the "sakashay" state of "satavedaniya" is not acquired here. The "anubhaga" acquired in the "sakashay" state is also only a fraction of infinity. Such a small "anubhaga" cannot be acquired in the "sakashay" state. This proves the usefulness of calling "anubhagabandha" separately from "prakritibandha".

The implication is that in "prakritibandha", although the difference in karma is accepted, "hinaadhik" (inferior/superior) "phaladanashakti" is not accepted. However, in "anubhagabandha", this and its cause are considered independently. Therefore, "prakritibandha" and its cause are independent, and "anubhagabandha" and...

Page #434:
---------------------------
[314] Sarvarthasiddhi
[8123 6 7798779. It has been stated that the bond of experience (anubhavabandh) is independent. Now, the bond of region (pradeshabhandh) is to be discussed. In discussing it, the following points need to be clarified: what are the causes, when does it occur, what is the instrument, what is its nature, in what does it occur, and what is its extent? To address these questions, the following sutra is presented in a sequential manner, keeping in mind the distinction between the questions raised. The cause is independent, this is certain. Now, regarding the sutrakar's statement about the experience of the result (vipak), the same meaning is implied in this statement. The result of all beings is not of the same kind, it is seen to be more or less, and this variation in the result cannot be without a cause. This is why the sutrakar independently considers the bond of experience and substantiates it through the result. Thus, we have considered what the bond of experience is and why it is called independent.
However, this section of the bond, as it is obtained in the time of bondage (bandhkal), does not remain exactly the same. Within its own time of existence, it changes and also does not change. Due to change, there are three stages: transition (sankraman), elevation (utkarshan), and degradation (apkarshan). Transition occurs in the sub-natures (avantaraprakriti), not in the original natures (moolaprakriti). Even in that, the transition of the life-karma (ayukarma) does not occur in the sub-natures, and the transition of the knowledge-delusion (darshanamohaniya) does not occur in the form of conduct-delusion (charitramohaniya), and the transition of the conduct-delusion does not occur in the form of knowledge-delusion. There are four types of transition: nature-transition (prakritisankraman), state-transition (sthitisankraman), section-transition (anubhagasankraman), and region-transition (pradeshasankraman). Where nature-transition and region-transition are predominant, it is addressed by the word transition, and where only state-transition and section-transition occur, it is addressed by the words elevation and degradation. The decrease in the state and section obtained in the time of bondage is degradation, and the increase in the decreased state and section is elevation. Thus, passing through various stages, the section that remains in the time of emergence (udayakal) undergoes maturation (paripāk). The maturation of the natures obtained in the non-emergent state (anudayavastā) occurs in the form of the same kind of nature obtained in the emergent state (udayavastā). The rule in this regard is that the fruit of the emergent natures is obtained directly (svamukhase), and the fruit of the non-emergent natures is obtained indirectly (paramukhase). For example, if the seven-fold (sata) is emergent, its enjoyment is also in the form of the seven-fold, but then the non-seven-fold (asata) continues to transform into the seven-fold through the transition of the state-section (stibuksankraman), therefore its emergence is indirect. The transformation of the non-emergent nature into the form of the nature obtained in the emergent state, before the time of emergence, is the state-section transition. All the natures that are not emergent in a particular time, but exist in the form of being (satta), continue to transform in this way at all times.
The section is of two types, based on the distinction between harmful (ghāti) and non-harmful (aghāti). The section of the four types of harmful natures is vine (lata), wood (daru), bone (asthi), and rock (shail). The two types of non-harmful natures are merit (punya) and demerit (pap). The section of the merit natures is divided into four parts: jaggery (gud), sugar (khanḍ), sugar candy (sharkara), and nectar (amrita). The four types of sections of the demerit natures are neem (nimba), sour fruit (kanjira), poison (vish), and poison (halaahal). Thus, the bond of section has been considered in general.
8779. The bond of experience has been stated! Now, the bond of region is to be stated. While stating it, these points are worth mentioning: what is the cause of the bond of region, when does it occur, what is its instrument, what is its nature, in what does it occur, and what is its extent? Thus, keeping these questions in mind, the next sutra is stated in a sequential manner.

Page #435:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

[315] The name-affections (karma) are subtle, confined to a single field, and abiding, being infinite in number, and they are found in all the regions of the soul. ||24|| 8780. The name-affections are called "name" because they are all the karmic substances, as is stated in the sutra "as they are named." This explains the cause. "Found in all" means that they are found in all the states of existence. The word "sarvatah" (found in all) is derived from the sutra "they are seen from other places also." This explains the time. For each individual soul, there are infinite past lives, and there are countless, innumerable, and infinite future lives. The word "yogaviseshat" (specific yoga) indicates that the karmic particles are acquired due to specific karmic conditions. The words "subtle" etc. are used to indicate the nature of the karmic particles that are capable of being acquired. The karmic particles that are capable of being acquired are subtle, not gross. The word "ekaksetravagaha" (confined to a single field) indicates that they are not found in other fields. The word "sthita" (abiding) indicates that they are not moving, but are stationary. The words "sarvatma-pradesesu" (in all the regions of the soul) indicate the basis. The karmic regions are not found in a single region or in a few regions. Where then are they found? They are found pervading all the regions of the soul, above, below, and sideways. The words "anantaanant-pradesha" (infinite in number) indicate that they are not countable, nor innumerable, nor infinite. These karmic aggregates are infinite times greater than the non-existent, and they are of the size of an infinite part of the liberated soul. They are confined to a field of an innumerable part of a ghana-angula (a measure of length), and they are abiding for a time that is countable, innumerable, and infinite. They are of five colors, five tastes, two smells, and four touches, and they are capable of being acquired by the eight types of karmic substances. They are acquired by the soul through the specific yoga. Thus, the karmic bondage should be understood in brief. 1.  Past lives are infinite, countless, and innumerable. 2.  Future lives are countless, innumerable, and infinite. 3.  They are acquired by the soul through the specific yoga.

Page #436:
---------------------------
## 316] Sarvarthasiddhi

[8125 83818781. It is said; the enumeration of the objects of bondage, namely, merit and demerit, has been stated, and it has been declared that they are included in bondage. In this connection, it is to be stated what is the bondage of merit and what is the bondage of demerit. In this regard, this sutra is begun for the enumeration of the nature of merit:

**Sadvaidyashubhayurnamagotrasani punyam ||25||** 8782.  "Shubha" means auspicious. This is connected with each of the subsequent terms, such as auspicious life, auspicious name, and auspicious lineage. Auspicious life is of three kinds: the life of a lower animal, the life of a human, and the life of a god. There are thirty-seven varieties of auspicious name. For example, the state of being a human, the state of being a god, the five-sense beings, the five bodies, the three limbs and appendages, the square-shaped form, the strong structure of a diamond, a bull, and a spear, auspicious color, auspicious taste, auspicious smell, and auspicious touch, the sequence of human states and the sequence of god states, these two, the heavier and the lighter, the striking, the exhaling, the heat, the radiance, the auspicious state of non-attachment, fear, haste, fulfillment, each body, stability, auspiciousness, prosperity, good voice, receiving, fame, creation, and the name of the Tirthankara. One high lineage is auspicious, and Sadvaidyam. These forty-two natures are called "punya".

**Special Meaning:** This sutra discusses the bondage of the region. The pudgala atoms that are taken in the form of karma undergo transformation in eight or seven ways, such as knowledge-obscuring karma, etc. Their intake is always happening in the state of the world. The main cause of intake is yoga. They are subtle. The intake of karma atoms occurs in the region where the soul is situated. The intake of other karma atoms does not occur. The karma atoms that are taken in reside in all the regions of the soul, and they are infinite. This is the meaning of this sutra. From this, the general outline of the bondage of the region and its cause become known.

8781. After the objects of bondage, merit and demerit have been enumerated, and their inclusion in bondage has been declared, it is to be stated here what is the bondage of merit and what is the bondage of demerit. In this regard, this sutra is begun for the enumeration of the nature of merit:

**Sadvaidyashubhayurnamagotrasani punyam ||25||** 8782.  "Shubha" means auspicious. This is connected with each of the subsequent terms, such as auspicious life, auspicious name, and auspicious lineage. Auspicious life is of three kinds: the life of a lower animal, the life of a human, and the life of a god. There are thirty-seven varieties of auspicious name. For example, the state of being a human, the state of being a god, the five-sense beings, the five bodies, the three limbs and appendages, the square-shaped form, the strong structure of a diamond, a bull, and a spear, auspicious color, auspicious taste, auspicious smell, and auspicious touch, the sequence of human states and the sequence of god states, these two, the heavier and the lighter, the striking, the exhaling, the heat, the radiance, the auspicious state of non-attachment, fear, haste, fulfillment, each body, stability, auspiciousness, prosperity, good voice, receiving, fame, creation, and the name of the Tirthankara. One high lineage is auspicious, and Sadvaidyam. These forty-two natures are called "punya".

**Special Meaning:** Here, forty-two auspicious natures are enumerated. Those that have more sections due to auspicious results are auspicious natures. This characteristic occurs in these natures, therefore, they are considered auspicious natures. In terms of bondage, the total number of natures is considered to be 120. In this regard, the number forty-two is specified here. Here, instead of enumerating twenty sub-categories of color, etc., only four categories are enumerated. The commentator of the Tattvartha-bhashya, Acharya Gṛddhapichchha, has also included samyaktva-prakriti, laughter, pleasure, and purusha-veda in the auspicious natures. And Vira Sena Swami has also established them as auspicious natures in the Jayadhavala commentary. Thus, the total number of auspicious natures is indicated. 1. Punya-bandha-prakriti-mu.

Page #437:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eight

**Other than this, the remaining are all of the nature of sin.** ||26||

§ 783.  The group of karmic actions that are different from the group of karmic actions known as "punya" (meritorious) are called "papa" (sinful). They are of eighty-two types. For example:

* Five types of **jnana-avaran** (knowledge obscuring)
* Nine types of **darshan-avaran** (perception obscuring)
* Twenty-six types of **mohaniya** (delusive)
* Five types of **antaraya** (hindering)
* **Naraka-gati** (hellish rebirth)
* **Tiryag-gati** (animal rebirth)
* Four **jati** (castes)
* Five **samsthana** (physical forms)
* Five **samhanana** (physical constitutions)
* **A-prashasta** (undesirable) **varna** (color), **rasa** (taste), **gandha** (smell), and **sparsa** (touch)
* **Naraka-gati-anupurvi** (successive hellish rebirths) and **Tiryag-gati-anupurvi** (successive animal rebirths) - these two
* **Upadhata** (harmful)
* **A-prashasta viha-yoga-gati** (undesirable state of liberation)
* **Sthavara** (immobile)
* **Sukshma** (subtle)
* **A-paryapti** (insufficiency)
* **Sadharana-sharira** (ordinary body)
* **Asthira** (unstable)
* **A-shubha** (inauspicious)
* **Dur-bhag** (unfortunate)
* **Du-svara** (harsh voice)
* **Anadeya** (unworthy of respect)
* **A-yasha** (disgrace)

These are thirty-four types of **nama-karma** (name-karma), **asa-vedaniya** (unpleasant), **naraka-ayu** (hellish lifespan), and **neecha-gotra** (low birth).

Thus, the **bandha** (bondage) is explained in detail. It is known through **avadhi-jnana** (clairvoyance), **mana-paryaya-jnana** (knowledge of the mind), and **kevala-jnana** (omniscience), and is inferred from the **agama** (scripture) taught by those who possess these knowledges.

**Special Note:** Here, the names of the sinful karmic actions are mentioned. Those that lead to undesirable results and accumulate more **anubhaga** (karmic potential) are sinful karmic actions. Here, a total of eighty-two sinful karmic actions are listed. The five **bandhana** (bondages) and **sanghata** (aggregates) are included in the five bodies, and the two karmic actions of **misra-mohaniya** (mixed delusive) and **samyak-tva-mohaniya** (delusive of right conduct) are not included. Also, the twenty **varna** (color) etc. are both desirable and undesirable. This is why they are included in both the meritorious and sinful karmic actions. Thus, there are a total of eighty-two sinful karmic actions, whose names are mentioned in the commentary.

Thus, the eighth chapter of the **Tattva-artha-vrutti** (Commentary on the Principles of Reality), known as **Sarvartha-siddhi** (Complete Fulfillment of All Purposes), is complete. ||8||

Page #438:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:

1. Bhava-samvara: Cessation of activities that lead to the influx of karmic matter.
2. Dravya-samvara: Stoppage of the inflow of new karmic matter.
3. Mithyatva: False belief.
4. Napumsaka-veda: Neuter gender.
5. Nairayika: Pertaining to hell.
6. Ekendriyas: One-sensed beings.
7. Dvindriyas: Two-sensed beings.
8. Trindriyas: Three-sensed beings.
9. Chaturindriyas: Four-sensed beings.
10. Hundasamsthanam: Worm-like body.
11. Asampraptatrasrapatikasanghananam: Incomplete development of body parts.
12. Nairayikagatiprayogyanupurvi: Tendency towards rebirth in hell.
13. Atapa: Radiant body.
14. Sthavara: Immobile beings.
15. Sukshma: Subtle.
16. Aparyaptas: Incomplete development.
17. Sadharana-sarira: Common body.
18. Anantanubandhi: Passions that bind one to infinite rebirths.
19. Pratyakhyanavarana: Obscuring of the power of renunciation.
20. Apratyakhyanavarana: Obscuring of the power of non-acceptance.

Page #439:
---------------------------
## Chapter 9

The twenty-five **prakritis** of **tiryanch-gati**, **madhyake char sansthan**, **madhyake char sanhanan**, **tiryanch-gati prayogyaanupurvi**, **udyot**, **aprashasht vihayogati**, **durbhag**, **duhswar**, **anaadey**, and **neechgotra** bind the living being from **ekendriya** to **saasadan samyagdrishti** **gunasthan**. Therefore, in the absence of **asanyam** arising from **anantaanubandhi** **udaya**, their **sanvar** occurs further.

The ten **prakritis** of **apratyakhyanaavaran krodha**, **apratyakhyanaavaran maan**, **apratyakhyanaavaran maya**, **apratyakhyanaavaran lobha**, **manushyaayu**, **manushya-gati**, **oudarik-sharira**, **oudarik ango-paang**, **vajrar-shabhanaraach sanhanan**, and **manushya-gati prayogyaanupurvi**, which receive **asrav** due to the **asanyam** arising from **apratyakhyanaavaran kshaya**, bind the living being from **ekendriya** to **asanyat samyagdrishti** **gunasthan**. Therefore, in the absence of **asanyam** arising from **apratyakhyanaavaran kshaya**, their **sanvar** occurs further.

It is noteworthy that **ayukarma** does not bind when **samyagmithyatva** **guna** is present.

The four **prakritis** of **apratyakhyanaavaran krodha**, **maan**, **maya**, and **lobha**, which receive **asrav** due to the **asanyam** arising from **apratyakhyanaavaran kshaya**, bind the living being from **ekendriya** to **sanyata-sanyat** **gunasthan**. Therefore, in the absence of **asanyam** arising from **apratyakhyanaavaran kshaya**, their **sanvar** occurs further.

The **karma** that receives **asrav** due to **pramad** undergoes **sanvar** in its absence. The **karma** that receives **asrav** due to **pramad** should be understood to undergo **sanvar** further in the absence of **pramad** in the **pramattasanyat** **gunasthan**. What is that **karma**? It is of six types, differentiated by the **prakritis** of **asataavedaniya**, **arati**, **shok**, **asthir**, **ashubha**, and **ayash-kirti**.

The beginning of **devaayu** binding is due to **pramad**, and also due to **apramad** that is close to it. Therefore, in its absence, its **sanvar** should be understood further.

The **karma** whose **asrav** is only due to **kshaya** and not due to **pramad** etc., undergoes **sanvar** in the absence of **kshaya**. That **kshaya**, which is devoid of **pramad** etc., is situated in the three **gunasthanas** as **tivra**, **madhyam**, and **jagahnya**.

Of these, in the initial **sankhyey bhaag** of the **apurvakaran** **gunasthan**, the two **karma-prakritis** of **nidra** and **prachala** are bound. Further, in the **sankhyey bhaag**, the **prakritis** of **devagati**, **panchendriya jati**, **vaikriyak sharira**, **aaharaka sharira**, **taijas sharira**, **karman sharira**, **samachaturasra sansthan**,

Page #440:
---------------------------
320]  The following thirty natures are bound by the **devagati** (divine path), **prayogyanupurvi** (sequential practice), **agurulaghu** (heavy and light), **upghata** (harm), **paradhata** (harm to others), **uccvasa** (exhalation), **prashasta vihayogati** (excellent liberation path), **tras** (fear), **badar** (obstruction), **paryapta** (sufficient), **pratyekasarira** (individual body), **sthira** (stable), **shubha** (auspicious), **subhaga** (prosperous), **susvara** (good voice), **adeya** (worthy of being received), **nirmana** (creation), and **tirthankara** (ford-maker): **aikriyika** (physical) body, **angopanga** (limbs and parts), **aharak** (food) body, **angopanga** (limbs and parts), **varna** (color), **gandha** (smell), **rasa** (taste), **sparsa** (touch), **devagati** (divine path), **prayogyanupurvi** (sequential practice), **agurulaghu** (heavy and light), **upghata** (harm), **paradhata** (harm to others), **uccvasa** (exhalation), **prashasta vihayogati** (excellent liberation path), **tras** (fear), **badar** (obstruction), **paryapta** (sufficient), **pratyekasarira** (individual body), **sthira** (stable), **shubha** (auspicious), **subhaga** (prosperous), **susvara** (good voice), **adeya** (worthy of being received), **nirmana** (creation), and **tirthankara** (ford-maker). At the end of this **gunasthan** (stage of spiritual development), the four natures of **hasya** (laughter), **rati** (attachment), **bhaya** (fear), and **jugupsa** (aversion) are bound. These are the natures that are bound by **tiivra kshaya** (intense passions), and their **samvara** (cessation) occurs after the **vivishta bhaga** (designated portion) due to the gradual cessation of intense passions. From the beginning of **anivritti badar sampray** (the state of non-return) until the designated portion, **puved** (pride) and **krodha** (anger) are bound. After that, in the remaining designated portions, **mana** (ego) and **maya** (delusion) are bound. At the end of this, **lobha** (greed) is bound. These natures are bound by **madhyama kshaya** (moderate passions), and their **samvara** (cessation) occurs after the **vivishta bhaga** (designated portion) due to the gradual cessation of moderate passions. The sixteen natures of **jnana avarana** (knowledge obscurations) (five), **darsana avarana** (perception obscurations) (four), **yasha kirti** (fame and glory), **uccarga** (high birth), and **antaraya** (internal obstacles) (five) are bound by **manda kshaya** (subtle passions) and their **samvara** (cessation) occurs after the **vivishta bhaga** (designated portion) due to the gradual cessation of subtle passions. The **samvara** (cessation) of **upashanta kshaya** (subdued passions), **kshina kshaya** (diminished passions), and **sayoga kevali** (those who have attained liberation through their own efforts) occurs due to **kevala yoga** (perfect knowledge and perfect conduct). The **samvara** (cessation) of **ayoga kevali** (those who have attained liberation through the efforts of others) occurs due to the absence of **yoga** (knowledge and conduct).

**Explanation:** **Samvara** (cessation) is the path of preventing new karmas (actions) and their causes from accumulating. Only after **samvara** (cessation) can the accumulated karmas and their causes be purified, leading to liberation. This passage explains the karmas and their causes in detail, according to their order in the **gunasthan** (stages of spiritual development). All beings should understand this and strive for **samvara** (cessation).

8788. The **samvara** (cessation) has been explained. Now, to explain its causes, the next sutra says:

That **samvara** (cessation) is achieved through **gupti** (secrecy), **samiti** (moderation), **dharma** (righteousness), **anupreksha** (reflection), **parisahjaya** (endurance), and **charitra** (conduct). ||2||

Page #441:
---------------------------
-9138791] Chapter Nine
[321 6789.  Gupti is that which protects the soul from the causes of the cycle of birth and death. Samiti is the right way of coming and going, lifting and placing, taking and releasing, for the purpose of avoiding harm to living beings. Dharma is that which is placed in the desired place. Anupreksha is the repeated contemplation of the nature of the body and other things. Parishha is the endurance of pain arising from hunger and other sensations, for the purpose of destroying karma. Parishhajay is the victory of endurance. The word Charitra has been explained in the first sutra. These, Gupti etc., are the most helpful in the process of Samvara, therefore their role is indicated in the sutra. Although Samvara is the main topic, it is referred to by the word 'sa' in this sutra, to show its direct connection with Gupti etc. Question - What is the purpose of this? Answer - The purpose is to establish that Samvara can only be achieved through Gupti etc., and not through any other means. This negates the practice of pilgrimage, abhisheka, taking initiation, offering the head as a gift, and worshipping deities, because karma acquired through attachment, aversion, and delusion cannot be destroyed otherwise.
8790. To explain the specific causes of Samvara and Nirjara, the next sutra says:
Through tapas, there is Nirjara and also Samvara. ||3||
8791. Tapas is included in Dharma, yet it is mentioned separately to show that it is the cause of both Samvara and Nirjara, and is the primary cause of Samvara. Question - Tapas is considered to be the cause of liberation, because it is accepted as the means to attain the state of Indra and other such places, so how can it be the cause of Nirjara?
Answer - There is no fault in this, because like fire, one thing can have many functions. Just as fire, though one, has many functions like burning, reducing to ashes, and producing embers, 1. 'Sanssaraduhkhalata sattvanyo dharatyuttama sukhe.' Ratna. p. 250. 2. Sambandhartha. Prayo Mu. 3. Martha. Samu. 4. 'Shirshopaharadhibhiratmadhukhairdevan kilaraadhya sukhabhivruddhah. Siddhyanti doshapachyanapeksha yuktam cha tesham tvamrishinan yesham.' Yuktyanu. Shlo. 39. 5. Mat, katham Mu. 6. Ko'pi kledabhasmasabhavadhip- Ma. -Ko'pi vikledabhasmasabhavadhipr- Di.21-Ko'pi pavanavikledabhasmasabhavadhipr- Di. 1.

Page #442:
---------------------------
## 322]
**On the attainment of all good**

[914 $ 792 There is no contradiction in the fact that the purpose of ashes, etc., is obtained, and that it is the cause of the destruction of the karma of the practice of austerity and its rise. $ 792. To understand the nature of the secrecy mentioned in the beginning as the cause of restraint, the following sutra says
**Restraint of the yogas in a proper way is secrecy.** ||4|| 8 793. Yoga has been explained in the sutra "Yoga is the karma of body, speech, and mind." Restraint is the cessation of its spontaneous activity. The qualifier "proper" is used to prohibit activity for the sake of desire for worldly pleasures. Therefore, when there is restraint of the yogas of body, etc., which is characterized by the qualifier "proper" and which does not give rise to afflictions, the karma that is its cause does not flow, and thus the attainment of restraint should be understood. It is of three types: restraint of the body, restraint of speech, and restraint of the mind. 8794. Now, to make known the blameless conduct of the ascetic who is unable to practice secrecy, the following sutra says
**Walking, speech, effort, taking and giving, and discharge are the five restraints.** ||5|| 8795. The word "proper" is understood here. It qualifies walking, etc. Proper walking, proper speech, proper effort, proper taking and giving, and proper discharge. These five restraints should be known as the means for the ascetic who knows the rules of the state of being, etc., to avoid harming living beings. Thus, restraint arises from the flow of karma caused by the consequences of improper conduct of the one who is acting.
$ 796. To understand the difference in the third cause of restraint, dharma, the following sutra says**

Page #443:
---------------------------
-916 8797] Chapter Nine
1323  Excellent forbearance, excellent gentleness, excellent straightforwardness, excellent purity, excellent truthfulness, excellent self-control, excellent austerity, excellent renunciation, excellent non-attachment, and excellent celibacy are the ten types of Dharma. ||6||
8 797. Question: Why is this said? Answer: The first reason is to restrain the tendencies. The second reason is to show the means of restraining the tendencies to those who are unable to do so. This explanation of the ten types of Dharma should be known to those who are engaged in the community, to avoid negligence. Forbearance is the absence of defilement when a mendicant, seeking the cause of the body's existence, encounters wicked people who insult, mock, scorn, beat, and torture the body. Gentleness is the absence of pride arising from birth or other sources. Straightforwardness is the absence of crookedness in the yogas. Purity is the renunciation of greed that has been acquired through excellence. Truthfulness is speaking good words to good people. Question: Does this fall under the category of verbal restraint? Answer: This is not a fault, because a muni who is engaged in the community speaks to both good and bad people in a way that is beneficial and measured. Otherwise, there would be the fault of punishment due to attachment. This is the meaning of verbal restraint. However, according to the true Dharma, a muni who is engaged in the community, a virtuous person, an initiated person, or their devotees, are allowed to inform others of many duties, such as teaching knowledge and character, and they do all this for the sake of the growth of Dharma. Therefore, true Dharma does not fall under the category of verbal restraint. Self-control is the restraint of the senses of a being who is engaged in the community. Austerity is the practice of penance for the destruction of karma. This should be understood as the twelve types that will be explained later. Renunciation is the giving of knowledge and other things that are suitable for the self-controlled. Non-attachment is the renunciation of the idea of "mine" in relation to the body and other things that have been acquired, even in those things, for the purpose of eliminating karmic impressions. One who has nothing is non-attached, and their state of mind or action is non-attachment. The remembrance of a woman who has been experienced, the hearing of stories about women,

Page #444:
---------------------------
[324] Sarvarthasiddhi
[9178 798] By abstaining from sleeping and sitting with women, one attains perfect Brahmacharya. Or, living in a Guru's house is Brahmacharya for the purpose of giving up independent livelihood. The best qualification is for the purpose of giving up the visible purpose. These are the causes of Samvara, which are to be contemplated in this way, and which are endowed with the designation of Dharma, and are imbued with the contemplation of the virtues and the defects of the opposing party.
8798. It has been said that anger, etc., do not arise from the contemplation of the opposite of Kshama, etc. There it is said, why does this being take refuge in Kshama, etc., and does not act otherwise? Because, like a heated iron ball, Kshama, etc., are to be done by those who are self-interested and have become mature.
Anitya, Asharana, Samsara, Ekatva, Anyatva, Ashuchi, Asrava, Samvara, Nirjara, Loka, Bodhidurlabha, and Dharmasvakhyatatva are the contemplations. ||7||
799. These are the objects of the body, senses, and enjoyment, which are in the form of aggregates, and are of the nature of impermanence like water bubbles, and are always found in special states like the womb, etc., and are opposite in nature to the combinations. Due to delusion, the ignorant person considers them to be eternal. Nothing in the world is permanent, except the nature of the self, which is the use of knowledge and vision. This contemplation is the contemplation of impermanence. Thus, when this Bhavy contemplates in this way, he does not have any attachment to them, and even at the time of separation, he does not experience any distress, like the smell of a garland that has been worn and then discarded.
8800. Just as there is no refuge for a young deer caught by a strong, hungry, and flesh-eating tiger in a secluded place, so also there is no refuge for a being in the world, which is impermanent, without refuge, full of suffering, and full of misery. 1. - Kulavaso Mu., Ta. 2. Hyasy Chinta- Mu., Ta.

Page #445:
---------------------------
-917 $ 802] Chapter Nine
[325 There is no refuge for a being wandering in the midst of birth, old age, death, disease, and other afflictions. Even a well-nourished body is helpful for food, not for the arrival of afflictions. Even wealth accumulated with effort does not follow to the next life. Even friends who have shared joys and sorrows equally cannot protect at the time of death. Relatives gathered together cannot protect a being afflicted by disease. If there is virtuous Dharma, it becomes a means of crossing the ocean of afflictions. Even the thousand-eyed beings, being taken away by death, are not a refuge. Therefore, in the midst of worldly afflictions, Dharma is the only refuge. Even a good friend is not permanent, there is no other refuge, this kind of contemplation is the contemplation of being without refuge. Thus, for one who contemplates in this way, the constant feeling of "I am always without refuge" leads to the abandonment of attachment to worldly things. Effort is made only in the path ordained by the Bhagavan Arhat Sarvagna.
8801. The attainment of another life due to the result of karma is samsara. It has been explained earlier as five types of transformations. Wandering in this samsara, which is filled with countless births, families, and millions of hardships, the being, driven by the karma-machine, becomes a father, brother, son, and grandson. It becomes a mother, sister, wife, and daughter. It becomes a master and then a servant. It becomes a servant and then a master. Like an actor on a stage. Or what is the point of saying more, it even becomes its own son. This kind of contemplation of the nature of samsara is the contemplation of samsara. Thus, contemplating in this way, one who is anxious due to the fear of the suffering of samsara becomes dispassionate. And being dispassionate, one strives to abandon samsara.
$ 802. The experience of the great suffering of the cycle of birth, old age, and death, for which there is only oneself, and no one else, neither friend nor foe, is the contemplation of being without refuge. There is no refuge for a being wandering in the midst of suffering. A well-nourished body is helpful for food, not for the arrival of suffering. Even wealth accumulated with effort does not follow to the next life. Friends who have shared joys and sorrows equally cannot protect at the time of death. Relatives gathered together cannot protect a being afflicted by disease. If there is virtuous Dharma, it becomes a means of crossing the ocean of suffering. Even the thousand-eyed beings, being taken away by death, are not a refuge. Therefore, in the midst of worldly afflictions, Dharma is the only refuge. It is the only friend and the only permanent wealth, there is no other refuge, this kind of contemplation is the contemplation of being without refuge. Thus, for one who contemplates in this way, the constant feeling of "I am always without refuge" leads to the abandonment of attachment to worldly things. Effort is made only in the path ordained by the Bhagavan Arhat Sarvagna.
8801. The attainment of another life due to the result of karma is samsara. It has been explained earlier as five types of transformations. Wandering in this samsara, which is filled with countless births, families, and millions of hardships, the being, driven by the karma-machine, becomes a father, brother, son, and grandson. It becomes a mother, sister, wife, and daughter. It becomes a master and then a servant. It becomes a servant and then a master. Like an actor on a stage. Or what is the point of saying more, it even becomes its own son. This kind of contemplation of the nature of samsara is the contemplation of samsara. Thus, contemplating in this way, one who is anxious due to the fear of the suffering of samsara becomes dispassionate. And being dispassionate, one strives to abandon samsara.
 8802. 'The experience of the great suffering of the cycle of birth, old age, and death, for which there is only oneself, and no one else, neither friend nor foe, is the contemplation of being without refuge. 1. Even accumulated wealth does not follow to the next life. 2. Abandonment of attachment becomes - A., Di. 1, Di. 2. Mu., Na. 3. One who has entered the path becomes - A., Di. 1, Di. 2, Mu. 4. - not driven by the machine. 5. Strives. 6. - the cycle of birth and death - Mu.

Page #446:
---------------------------
326] Sarvarthasiddhi
[917 $ 803] I am born alone, and I die alone. No one, neither kin nor stranger, can alleviate my suffering from disease, old age, and death. Relatives and friends do not go beyond the cremation ground. Dharma is my only helper, my eternal companion. This contemplation of oneness is Ekattvanupreksha. Thus, one who contemplates in this way does not develop attachment to loved ones, nor hatred towards strangers. Having attained detachment, he strives only for liberation.
803. Contemplation of otherness from the body is Anyatvanupreksha. For example, even though there is no difference in essence with respect to a bond, due to the difference in characteristics, 'I' am different. The body is sensory, I am non-sensory. The body is ignorant, I am the knower. The body is impermanent, I am eternal. The body has a beginning and an end, I am beginningless and endless. In the course of my wanderings in the world, countless bodies of mine have passed away. I am different from them. Thus, if I am different from the body, then, O dear one, what is the wonder if I am different from external objects? Thus, the mind of one who contemplates in this way does not develop attachment to the body and other things. As a result, with the intense detachment that arises from the contemplation of the true nature of things, one attains the ultimate bliss of liberation.
804. This body is the womb of extremely impure substances. It has grown from impure substances like semen and blood. It is a receptacle of impure substances like a latrine. It is covered only by skin. It is a fountain of extremely foul-smelling juice. It quickly destroys even the things that come into its shelter, like a burning coal. Even by bathing, anointing, incense, rubbing, and wearing garlands, its impurity cannot be removed. But the right vision, when contemplated properly, reveals the ultimate purity of the soul. This contemplation of the true nature of things is Ashuchitanupreksha. Thus, one who contemplates in this way is detached from the body. 1. I am born alone.  2. They do not go beyond the cremation ground. 3. The body is sensory, I am non-sensory. 4. One attains the ultimate bliss of liberation. 5. This body is the womb of extremely impure substances like semen and blood.

Page #447:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

[327] Remembering the body's misery, the soul becomes detached.  It then focuses its mind on crossing the ocean of birth.

805. The concepts of *āsrava*, *samvara*, and *nirjarā* have been previously explained, but they are being discussed again here to understand their qualities and defects.  *Āsrava* is the cause of suffering in this world and the next.  It is as sharp as the flow of a great river and takes the form of the senses, passions, and non-observance of vows.  The senses, such as touch, lead beings like elephants, crows, snakes, insects, and deer into the ocean of suffering.  Similarly, passions like anger, pride, deceit, and greed cause suffering like death, bondage, disgrace, and torment in this world.  In the next world, they cause beings to wander through various realms of existence, burning with various kinds of suffering.  Reflecting on the defects of *āsrava* is called *āsrava-anuprekṣā*.  Such contemplation does not diminish the understanding of the virtues like forgiveness.  All these defects of *āsrava* do not affect a soul that has withdrawn itself like a tortoise.

806. Just as a boat in the vast ocean, if its holes are not covered, will inevitably sink due to the influx of water, and if its holes are covered, it will reach its desired destination without any trouble, similarly, when the doors of karma are closed, there is no obstacle to liberation.  Reflecting on the virtues of *samvara* is called *samvara-anuprekṣā*.  Such contemplation leads to constant effort in *samvara* and ultimately to the attainment of liberation.

807. *Nirjarā* is the name given to the ripening of karma.  It is of two types: *abuddhi-pūrva* (unconscious) and *kuśala-mūla* (virtue-based).  The *abuddhi-pūrva* *nirjarā* arises from the ripening of karma in the realms of hell, etc., and is associated with unwholesome actions.  The *kuśala-mūla* *nirjarā* arises from the conquest of passions and is associated with wholesome actions.  It can be further divided into *śubha-anubandha* (associated with auspicious karma) and *nir-anubandha* (not associated with any karma).  Reflecting on the qualities and defects of *nirjarā* is called *nirjarā-anuprekṣā*.  Such contemplation leads to detachment and a focused mind on crossing the ocean of birth.

Page #448:
---------------------------
## 328] Sarvarthasiddhi

[917 8808 Remembering the destruction of karma, there is a tendency towards it.
8808. The method of establishing the world, etc., has been explained before. That is, the method of establishing the world, etc., of the world that exists in the middle of the infinite, non-luminous space, has been explained before. Contemplating its nature is Lokanupreksha. In this way, the purity of knowledge of the truth is achieved for this seeker.
6809. In one nigoda body, there are infinite qualities of Jivas from the Siddhas. In this way, the entire world is constantly filled with stationary beings. Therefore, in this world, obtaining the state of liberation is as rare as finding a grain of sand in a sea of sand. Even in that, due to the abundance of beings with defective senses, obtaining the five senses is as rare as obtaining gratitude in qualities. Even in that, there are many animals, deer, birds, and reptiles, so obtaining the human state is as difficult as finding a treasure trove on a crossroads. And even after obtaining the human state, its loss and subsequent rebirth are as difficult as the rebirth of a burnt tree from its pudgalas. If by chance it is obtained again, then country, family, sensory faculties, and freedom from disease are increasingly difficult to obtain. Even after obtaining all these, if the attainment of the right Dharma does not happen, then the birth of a human being is as useless as a mouth without sight. Obtaining that Dharma, which is so difficult to obtain, and then indulging in worldly pleasures is as futile as burning sandalwood for ashes. However, for one who is detached from worldly pleasures, the attainment of Samadhi, characterized by the practice of austerity, the influence of Dharma, and a happy death, is very rare. When this happens, the attainment of Bodhi is fruitful, contemplating this is Bodhidurlabhanupreksha. In this way, contemplating this, the one who contemplates this, has a tendency towards the destruction of his karma.
8608. The method of establishing the world, etc., has been explained before. That is, the method of establishing the world, etc., of the world that exists in the middle of the infinite, non-luminous space, has been explained before. Contemplating its nature is Lokanupreksha. In this way, the purity of knowledge of the truth is achieved for this seeker.
$ 809. In one nigoda body, there are infinite qualities of Jivas from the Siddhas. In this way, the entire world is constantly filled with stationary beings. Therefore, in this world, obtaining the state of liberation is as rare as finding a grain of sand in a sea of sand. Even in that, due to the abundance of beings with defective senses, obtaining the five senses is as rare as obtaining gratitude in qualities. Even in that, there are many animals, deer, birds, and reptiles, so obtaining the human state is as difficult as finding a treasure trove on a crossroads. And even after obtaining the human state, its loss and subsequent rebirth are as difficult as the rebirth of a burnt tree from its pudgalas. If by chance it is obtained again, then country, family, sensory faculties, and freedom from disease are increasingly difficult to obtain. Even after obtaining all these, if the attainment of the right Dharma does not happen, then the birth of a human being is as useless as a mouth without sight. Obtaining that Dharma, which is so difficult to obtain, and then indulging in worldly pleasures is as futile as burning sandalwood for ashes. However, for one who is detached from worldly pleasures, the attainment of Samadhi, characterized by the practice of austerity, the influence of Dharma, and a happy death, is very rare. When this happens, the attainment of Bodhi is fruitful, contemplating this is Bodhidurlabhanupreksha. In this way, contemplating this, the one who contemplates this, has a tendency towards the destruction of his karma.
I. Tamev Kri.- A., Di 1, Di. 2.

Page #449:
---------------------------
-9186 813] Ninth Chapter
[329 Negligence never occurs.
8810. This Dharma, taught by the Jina, is characterized by non-violence, truth is its foundation, humility is its root, forgiveness is its strength, it is protected by celibacy, tranquility is its essence, destiny is its characteristic, and non-attachment is its support. Due to the lack of this, beings wander in the endless cycle of birth and death, experiencing suffering caused by the consequences of bad karma. However, upon attaining this, liberation is certain, preceded by the attainment of various kinds of progress. This contemplation is Dharma-svakhyatatva-anupreksha. Thus, contemplating this, one always strives for its attainment due to devotion to Dharma.
8811. In this way, by the proximity of anupreksha of impermanence, etc., great restraint arises from the upholding of supreme forgiveness, etc. The word 'anupreksha' in the middle has a double meaning. By contemplating anupreksha, one upholds supreme forgiveness, etc., and strives to conquer the obstacles. 8812. What are those obstacles, and why are they endured? This is explained by the sutra:
Obstacles are to be endured for the sake of not deviating from the path and for the sake of their destruction. ||8|| 8813. Since restraint is the subject matter, it is an attribute of the path. Therefore, the word 'path' in the sutra should be understood as the path of restraint. Obstacles are to be endured for the sake of not deviating from it and for the sake of their destruction. Those who endure hunger, thirst, etc., do not deviate from the path taught by the Jina, and by their continuous practice of the path, they close the door to the inflow of karma, experience the preliminary fruits of karma, and gradually destroy their karma, attaining liberation. Negligence does not occur.
8810. This Dharma, taught by the Jina, is characterized by non-violence, truth is its foundation, humility is its root, forgiveness is its strength, it is protected by celibacy, tranquility is its essence, destiny is its characteristic, and non-attachment is its support. Due to the lack of this, beings wander in the endless cycle of birth and death, experiencing suffering caused by the consequences of bad karma. However, upon attaining this, liberation is certain, preceded by the attainment of various kinds of progress. This contemplation is Dharma-svakhyatatva-anupreksha. Thus, contemplating this, one always strives for its attainment due to devotion to Dharma.
8811. In this way, by the proximity of anupreksha of impermanence, etc., great restraint arises from the upholding of supreme forgiveness, etc. The word 'anupreksha' in the middle has a double meaning. By contemplating anupreksha, one upholds supreme forgiveness, etc., and strives to conquer the obstacles.
8812. What are those obstacles, and why are they endured? This is explained by the sutra:
Obstacles are to be endured for the sake of not deviating from the path and for the sake of their destruction. ||8|| 8813. Since restraint is the subject matter, it is an attribute of the path. Therefore, the word 'path' in the sutra should be understood as the path of restraint. Obstacles are to be endured for the sake of not deviating from it and for the sake of their destruction. Those who endure hunger, thirst, etc., do not deviate from the path taught by the Jina, and by their continuous practice of the path, they close the door to the inflow of karma, experience the preliminary fruits of karma, and gradually destroy their karma, attaining liberation. 1. Always done- Ta. 2. Or bearable- Mu.

Page #450:
---------------------------
3305
Sarvarthasiddhi
[9198814F814. Tat-swaroopa-sankhya-samprapatti-artham aah-kshud-pipasa-sheeta-ushna-dansha-mashaka-agni-arati-stree-charya-nishadya-ashaya-akrosh-yachana
laabha-roga-truna-sparsha-mala-satkar-puruskar-prajna-ajnana-adarshanaani ||9||
8815. Kshud-aadyo vedana-vishesha dvaavimshati. Etesham sahanam moksha-arthina kartavyam. Tadyatha-bhikshu-niravadya-ahaar-gaveshina tad-alaabhe eeshal-laabhe cha anivritta-vedanasya akale adeshe cha bhiksham prati nivritta-ichhasya avashyaka-pariharaani manaag-apy-asahamanasya svaadhyaaya-dhyaan-bhaavana-parasya bahukritvah svakrita-parakrita-anashava-maudaryasya neeras-ahaarasyas santapta-bhrashtra-patita-jala-bindhu-katipaya-vatsa-sahasa parishushka-paanasya udorn-kshud-vedanasya api sato bhikshalaabhaad-alaabham adhik-gunam manyamanasya kshud-baadham pratyachintanam kshud-vijaya.
8816. Jalasnaana-avagaahana-parisheka-parityagina pattra-trivad-aniyata-asana-vasathasya ati-lavan. Snigdha-ruksha-viruddha-ahaar-greshama-tapa-pitta-jvara-anashaadibhir-adeerna shareera-indriya-onmaathini pipasam pratyanaadriyamaan-pratikaarasya pipasa-nala-shikham dhritina-navamrid-ghata-purita-sheetala-sugandhi-samaadhi-vaarina prasashayatah pipasa-sahan prasasyate.
8817. Parityakta-prachhadanasya pakshivad-anavdhaarita-alayasyavruksha-moola-pathi-shila-talaadishu
8814. Now, to make known the nature and number of these trials, the next aphorism is spoken:
Hunger, thirst, cold, heat, bites of insects, nakedness, aversion, women, walking, sitting, lying down, crying out, begging, lack of gain, disease, contact with grass, excrement, honor and dishonor, knowledge, ignorance, and non-perception, these are the trials. ||9||
8815. Hunger and the other specific pains are twenty-two in number. A seeker of liberation should endure these. For example, a mendicant who seeks blameless food, who does not experience the pain of hunger when he does not get food or when he gets only a little, who does not desire food at the wrong time or in the wrong place, who does not endure even a little loss of what is necessary, who is devoted to study, meditation, and contemplation, who has repeatedly performed austerities of fasting and humiliation, who eats tasteless food, whose throat is dry like a few drops of water that have fallen into a very hot vessel, who, even when the pain of hunger is aroused, considers the lack of food to be more meritorious than the gain of food, his non-thinking about the pain of hunger is the conquest of the trial of hunger.
8816. He who has renounced bathing in water, immersing himself in it, and being sprinkled with it, whose seat and dwelling are not fixed like those of a bird, who is not distressed by excessive salty, oily, or dry food, by the heat of the sun, by fever due to bile, by fasting, and so on, who does not feel aversion to the thirst that arises from these and that agitates the body and senses, and who quenches the fire of thirst with the cool, fragrant water of meditation, filled in a new earthen pot of fortitude, his endurance of thirst is praiseworthy.
8817. He who has renounced clothing, whose dwelling is not fixed like that of a bird, who lives at the roots of trees, on paths, or on the surface of rocks,

Page #451:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine:  Praise for the Endurance of Cold and Bites

**818.**  In a windless, waterless, sun-scorched forest, devoid of shade and filled with dry, fallen leaves, where the heat generated by internal austerities like fasting burns intensely, and the scorching heat of fire, harsh wind, and sun dries the throat and palate, one who has experienced many remedies for this heat but does not contemplate them, whose mind is focused on alleviating the suffering of beings, and who maintains their vows, is praised for their endurance of heat.

**819.**  The term "bite-inflicting insects" is used as a general term. Just as the term "crow" in the phrase "Protect the ghee from crows" is used to represent all harmful creatures, so too, the term "bite-inflicting insects" includes biting insects, flies, fleas, gnats, bedbugs, beetles, ants, scorpions, and so on. One who endures the pain inflicted by these creatures without seeking any remedy, who does not harm them in thought, word, or deed, and whose only aspiration is to attain liberation, is praised for their endurance of the pain inflicted by bite-inflicting insects.

**820.**  One who embodies the pure, unblemished nature of a child, whose attainment is impossible to request, who is free from the vices of begging, protecting, and harming, who is free from possessions and whose sole means of attaining liberation is non-attachment, whose mind is free from fluctuations and distractions, who visualizes women as extremely impure and repulsive, who maintains unbroken celibacy day and night, and who observes the vow of non-possession without any fault, is to be understood as having attained the perfect vow of non-possession.

**821.**  One who is restrained and indifferent to the objects of the senses, who avoids music, dance, and musical instruments, who dwells in the roots of trees, crossroads, and rocky places, and who, when snow falls and a cold wind blows, does not desire any remedy but remains content, who does not remember the remedies for cold that they have experienced in the past, and who dwells in the storehouse of knowledge and contemplation, is worthy of praise for their endurance of the pain of cold.

Page #452:
---------------------------
## 332] Sarvarthasiddhau

[919 $ 822] In empty houses, groves of trees, caves in rocks, and other such places, one who is absorbed in self-study, meditation, and contemplation, who remembers what they have seen, heard, and experienced, whose heart is impervious to the entry of the arrows of desire, and who is always compassionate towards all beings, should be understood to have conquered the obstacle of aversion.

[8822] In secluded gardens, buildings, and other such places, one who is unmoved by the allurements of young women intoxicated by passion, infatuation, and alcohol, who has restrained the passions of the senses and the heart, who has rejected seductive smiles, soft words, amorous glances, laughter, and languid movements, and who has rendered the arrows of Cupid ineffective, should be understood to have conquered the obstacle of aversion to women.

[8823] One who has lived in a gurukul for a long time, has practiced celibacy, has understood the nature of bondage and liberation, has become a guest in a foreign land for the sake of the practice of restraint and devotion to the body of restraint, has been granted permission by their guru, embraces detachment like the wind, has endured many hardships like fasting, emaciation, counting breaths, and renunciation of taste, whose body is weary due to these hardships, who avoids travel that is not in accordance with the principles of time and place, who has renounced footwear, who remembers to travel by appropriate vehicles and conveyances even when their feet are pierced by sharp gravel, thorns, and other such things, and who fulfills all necessary obligations in a timely manner, should be understood to have conquered the obstacle of aversion to conduct.

[6824] One who dwells in cremation grounds, gardens, empty houses, mountain caves, and deep pits, where they have not previously resided, who has established a code of conduct in a place that has been tested by the light of the sun and the knowledge of their own senses, who sits in a fixed posture for a set period of time, and who is not afraid of the various terrifying sounds of lions, tigers, and other such creatures, should be understood to have conquered the obstacle of aversion to fear.

Page #453:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

**8825.** The victory over the obstacle of sitting (**Niṣadyāpariṣaha-vijaya**) is ascertained for one who, due to the fatigue caused by self-study, meditation, and walking, experiences sleep for a muhūrta in a region of the earth that is harsh, uneven, and abundant with pebbles and shards, extremely cold and extremely hot, and who, while lying down in a particular way, either on one side or in a stretched-out posture, does not change position to avoid harming living beings, like a fallen tree or a corpse, whose mind is absorbed in knowledge and contemplation, whose body does not move even when subjected to various obstacles caused by external factors, and who endures the pain caused by these obstacles for an indefinite period.

**8826.** The victory over the obstacle of anger (**Ākrośa-pariṣaha-sahaṇa**) is ascertained for one who, even while hearing harsh, contemptuous, abusive, and insulting words that are fueled by the fire of anger and uttered by those driven by false views, does not let his mind become attached to them, even though he is capable of retaliating immediately, but instead contemplates that this is the result of past evil deeds, and who, upon hearing these words, remains steadfast in his contemplation of the practice of austerities, does not allow even a trace of the poison of passions to enter his heart.

**8827.** The victory over the obstacle of physical pain (**Niṣadyāpariṣaha-vijaya**) is ascertained for one whose body is being tortured by sharp swords, maces, and hammers, and who, even while being beaten, does not experience any mental disturbance, thinking, "This is the result of my past evil deeds. What can these unfortunate beings do? This body is like a water bubble, destined to perish. They are inflicting this extreme pain because of the cause of suffering. My right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct cannot be destroyed by any obstacle."

Page #454:
---------------------------
## 334] Sarvarthasiddhi

[919 $ 828] One who contemplates that the mind is burnt by knowledge, is considered to have conquered the challenge of death, as he is indifferent to the application of sandalwood paste and the removal of dirt.

[8828] One who is dedicated to the practice of both external and internal austerities, whose body has been purified by the force of such contemplation, whose body is like a tree devoid of shade, with only skin, bones, and a network of veins remaining, due to the intense heat of the sun, who does not beg for food, shelter, or medicine even when facing death, using words of humility, a pale face, and gestures, and whose form is as difficult to perceive as lightning during the day, is considered to have conquered the challenge of begging.

[6829] One who is unattached like the wind, who wanders through many lands, who accepts only one meal a day, who remains silent or follows the rules of speech, whose principle is to show his body only once, whose vessel is only the palm of his hand, who does not receive alms for many days or in many houses, whose mind is free from distress, who is eager to test the nature of the giver, and who is content with the thought that "even if I do not receive anything, it is the greatest austerity for me," is considered to have conquered the challenge of non-receipt.

[8830] One who understands that this body is the abode of all impurities, that it is impermanent, and that it is not worthy of protection, who is free from any attachment to the body due to the absence of any thoughts, who considers the body as the cause for the accumulation, growth, protection, and maintenance of the treasure of virtues, who has accepted the principle of the body's existence, who accepts food that is beneficial like applying ointment to a wound or cleaning dirt, who is not overwhelmed by the diseases caused by the imbalance of eating and drinking, such as wind, even when afflicted by hundreds of diseases at once, who does not succumb to them, who, even when possessing many special austerities and the ability to obtain quick remedies, is indifferent to the body due to detachment, is considered to have conquered the challenge of disease.

Page #455:
---------------------------
- Chapter 9
[335 5831. The term 'tṛṇa' (grass) is used to denote any cause of pain that is inflicted by a weapon. Therefore, when one experiences pain in the feet due to dry grass, rough gravel, thorns, sharp earth, or a splinter, and one's mind is not attached to it, and one constantly avoids harming living beings in one's actions, speech, and posture, then one should know that this is victory over the suffering caused by the contact with grass, etc.
6832. For one who has taken the vow of non-bathing until death, in order to avoid harming non-human beings, even when one experiences itching due to the accumulation of dust brought by the wind, which is caused by the heat of the sun's rays, and which has arisen from boils, scabies, and ringworm, and even when one is free from scratching, rubbing, and other actions that alleviate itching, one whose mind is focused on the accumulation of one's own impurities and the removal of impurities through the cleansing of pure water, which is the essence of right knowledge and conduct, and who is constantly striving to eliminate the impurities of karma, is said to be enduring the suffering of impurities.
6833. Respect means worship and praise. Reward means to do something in advance, such as initiating an action or inviting someone. In this regard, he is showing me disrespect. Although I have practiced celibacy for a long time, I am a great ascetic, I know the difference between my time and others' time, and I have defeated many opponents, yet no one shows me respect, devotion, or offers me a seat with enthusiasm. It is only those with false views who are extremely devoted, who, even though they do not know anything, consider everyone to be omniscient, and who honor them by influencing their time. The Vyantaras, etc., used to perform elaborate rituals for those who practiced very severe austerities. If this is not a false tradition, then why don't they do the same for those like us now? This is known as victory over the suffering of disrespect and reward, which is the result of a mind devoid of right intention.
6834. I am proficient in the Anga, Purva, and Prakirnaka scriptures, and I am skilled in grammar, logic, and spirituality. 1. -vyathan  Mu.। 2.  svēdāttapava- Mu.। 3. -lopacayagata  Mu.। 4. saṁjñāna- Mu.। 5. pankajālanirā- Mu.। 6. -syāyate । keśaluñcasamskārābhyāmutpannakhedasahana malasāmānyasahane'ntarbhavatiti na pṛthagu ktam । satkāra:- Mu.। 7.-daro'pi kri- Mu.। 8. svaśāsana prabhā- tā.। 9.  jayaḥ pratijñā- Mu.।

Page #456:
---------------------------
## 336] Sarvarthasiddhi

[919 8 835] It should be understood that the elimination of the pride of knowledge is the victory over the Pariṣaha of wisdom, just as the light of a firefly does not shine in the presence of the sun's rays.

[8835] One should understand the victory over the Pariṣaha of ignorance as the one who does not think, "I am ignorant, I am like an animal," even though he endures the scornful words of others, has practiced the most difficult austerities, and has a mind that is always alert.

[8836] One whose heart is purified by the feeling of supreme detachment, who knows the true nature of all things, who is a devotee of the Arhat, Ayatana, Sadhu, and Dharma, and who has been a renunciant for a long time, still does not experience the transcendence of knowledge. The claim that special powers have arisen for those who practice great fasts and other austerities is mere talk, this renunciation is meaningless, the observance of vows is futile, etc. - one should understand the endurance of the Pariṣaha of non-perception as the result of the purification of vision, not considering these things in the mind.

[6837] Thus, for one who endures the Pariṣaha that arise without any intention, and whose mind is free from defilements, there is great restraint due to the cessation of the flow of the karmic currents of attachment, aversion, etc.

[6838] It is asked, "Do all these Pariṣaha arise for those who are striving to cross the great forest of Samsara, or are there any special ones?" It is said here that these Pariṣaha, such as hunger, etc., which have been described, are to be experienced in relation to different types of conduct. However, in these two, one should understand the following rules:

1. -Dhavakṣepa Mu. -Dyavikṣepa - Di. 1,2.
2. Me'dyatvepi Vijña - Mu. 3. -Ṣahan Saha - Mu.

Page #457:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

**10. There are fourteen types of Pariṣahas in Sūkṣma Sāmprāya and Chhadmastha Vītarāga.**

839. Hunger, thirst, cold, heat, insect bites, walking, sleeping, death, loss, disease, touch of grass, excrement, wisdom, and ignorance are the fourteen Pariṣahas. The word "fourteen" in the sūtra indicates that there are no other Pariṣahas. 

**Doubt:** It is reasonable that the rule of fourteen Pariṣahas applies to Chhadmastha Vītarāga because of the absence of Mohaniya and the eight Pariṣahas mentioned later. However, in Sūkṣma Sāmprāya, the rule of fourteen Pariṣahas does not seem to apply because Mohaniya is present.

**Resolution:** This is incorrect because Mohaniya is present. In Sūkṣma Sāmprāya, there is only the arousal of the Kṣaya of greed, and that too is very subtle. Therefore, since it is similar to Chhadmastha Vītarāga, the rule of fourteen Pariṣahas applies there as well.

**Doubt:** Since there is no support for the arousal of Mohaniya and it is slow, there is no experience of pain like hunger, etc. Therefore, the term "Pariṣaha" does not apply to their actions.

**Resolution:** This is not true because only the power is intended. Just as we refer to the ability of the Sarvārthasiddhi Dev to travel to the seventh earth, we should understand it here as well.

**11. There are eleven Pariṣahas in a Jina.**

840. If it is acknowledged that Pariṣahas are present in a soul with a body, then how many Pariṣahas are experienced by a liberated soul who has attained Kevala Jnāna and is subject to the fruits of the four karmas? This is explained here.

841. In a Jina who has destroyed the four destructive karmas, there are eleven Pariṣahas due to the presence of Vedaniya karma.

**Doubt:** Since there is no support for the arousal of Mohaniya and there is no experience of pain like hunger, etc., the term "Pariṣaha" does not apply.

**Resolution:** This is not true because only the power is intended. Just as we refer to the ability of the Sarvārthasiddhi Dev to travel to the seventh earth, we should understand it here as well.

Page #458:
---------------------------
[338] Sarvarthasiddhi
[91118 841] Even though there is no feeling of pain, the term "parishah" is used due to the presence of dravyakarma. Similarly, even though there is no cessation of thought due to the complete destruction of jnanaavarana, the term "dhyana" is used due to the result of karma destruction. Alternatively, the remaining part of the sentence "they do not exist" should be assumed for the eleven Jinas, as the sutras are suggestive. This is based on the assumption that "the remaining part of the sentence should be assumed and the sentence is subject to the speaker." The remaining part of the sentence "they do not exist" is assumed due to the absence of feelings like hunger, etc., which are aided by the rise of moha. The statement that "parishah" is not appropriate in the absence of feelings like hunger, etc., is true. However, even in the absence of feelings, the term "parishah" is used here due to the presence of dravyakarma. Just as the term "dhyana" is used even in the absence of cessation of thought due to the complete destruction of jnanaavarana, which reveals the secrets of all substances, due to the result of karma destruction, similarly, the term "parishah" should be understood here. Alternatively, the remaining part of the sentence "there are no eleven parishah in the Jina Bhagavans" should be assumed, as the sutras are suggestive. It is also accepted that "the remaining part of the sentence should be assumed and the sentence is subject to the speaker." The remaining part of the sentence "they do not exist" is assumed due to the absence of feelings like hunger, etc., which are aided by the rise of moha.
Special Meaning - The Jina Bhagavans experience the rise of asata vedaniya, which is the cause of feelings like hunger, etc. Therefore, the eleven parishah are referred to here from the perspective of the cause of the Jina Bhagavans. However, the question arises whether the Jina Bhagavans actually experience the eleven parishah like hunger, etc. The commentary provides two solutions to this question. Firstly, the existence of the eleven parishah like hunger, etc., is indicated due to the presence of the cause of their existence, but from the perspective of action, the Jina Bhagavans do not experience the eleven parishah like hunger, etc. Therefore, from this perspective, the remaining part of the sentence "they do not exist" is assumed and their non-existence is stated there. Now, it needs to be understood how the Jina Bhagavans do not experience the eleven parishah like hunger, etc. They are not found in this time, so it cannot be known by direct observation. Only the arguments that support the Agamas remain, by relying on which this can be understood. Therefore, they are indicated here -
1. The Kevali Jinas do not have nigoda and trasas in their bodies. They are the possessors of the supreme audarik body due to the absence of kshina moha in their gunasthan. Therefore, they do not experience the hindrance of hunger, thirst, and diseases, as the cause of these does not exist. The special quality that exists in the bodies of the Devas due to the absence of these beings is multiplied infinitely in their bodies. 2. As one ascends the ladder of श्रेणि, the proportion of auspicious natures increases infinitely, and the proportion of inauspicious natures decreases infinitely at every moment. Therefore, the rise of asata nature in the thirteenth gunasthan is not so powerful that it can be considered as an indicator of actions like hunger, etc. 3. The stimulation of asata occurs only up to the sixth gunasthan, not beyond. Therefore, in the absence of stimulation, the vedaniya karma is unable to cause feelings like hunger, etc. Since the bodies of the Kevali Jinas do not require water and food, how can they experience hunger and thirst due to their non-availability? 1. 'Kalyo hi vakyasesho vakyam vaktarvadhinam hi' - Pa. Ma. Bha. 1, 1, 8. 2. - Bhavat. Aha Mu.

Page #459:
---------------------------
-9112 8 843] Ninth Chapter
[339 8 842. It is said, if there are separate Pariṣahas in Sūkṣma-Sāmprāya etc., then where are all of them together?
"All Pariṣahas are possible in Bādarasaṃpārāya." ||12|| 8843. Sāmpārāya is Kṣaya. One whose Sāmpārāya is Bādar is called Bādarasaṃpārāya. This is not the acceptance of a particular Guṇasthāna. What then? It is a meaningful instruction. By this, the acceptance of Pramatta etc. and the restrained ones is done. In them, because of the non-diminishing nature of Kṣaya and Dosha, all Pariṣahas are possible. In which conduct are all Pariṣahas possible? In each of Samāyika, Chhedopasthāpana, Parihāra, Viśuddhi, and Samyama, all Pariṣahas are possible.
The function of Vedaniya Karma is not the absence of water element and food element in the body. In fact, their absence is due to other reasons. Yes, the pain that occurs for the fulfillment of their absence is the work of Vedaniya Karma. So, when the body of the Kevali Jina does not have any need, how can the pain caused by Vedaniya occur? That is, it cannot occur. 4. The Āsrava of the Kevali Jina is always present, so its Nirjarā also always occurs. Therefore, in the time when Asātaka arises, it does not arise alone, but it arises with the Sātaka, which is infinitely powerful. Suppose that at that time, its own arising is happening, but it happens along with the Nirjarā of the Sātaka Karma-paramaṇus that bind every moment. Therefore, the arising of Asātaka cannot be the cause of pain like hunger there. 5. Even though the Vedana of Sukha-Duḥkha is the function of Vedaniya Karma, it happens only with the help of Mohaniya. Since the Kevali Jina lacks Mohaniya, it does not seem reasonable to believe in the existence of pain like hunger there. From these proofs, it is certain that the Kevali Jina does not have eleven Pariṣahas like hunger.
6842. It is said - If there are separate Pariṣahas in Sūkṣma-Sāmprāya etc., then to tell where they are together, the next sūtra is said:
All Pariṣahas are possible in Bādarasaṃpārāya. ||12||
8 843. Sāmpārāya is called Kṣaya. One whose Sāmpārāya is Bādar is called Bādarasaṃpārāya. This is not the acceptance of a particular Guṇasthāna. What then? It is a meaningful instruction. By this, the acceptance of Pramatta etc. and the restrained ones is done. In them, because of the non-diminishing nature of Kṣaya and Dosha, or Kṣaya-Dosha, all Pariṣahas are possible. Doubt - Then in which conduct are all Pariṣahas possible? Solution - Samāyika, Chhedopasthāpana, Parihāra, Viśuddhi, and Samyama, in each of these, all Pariṣahas are possible.
Special Meaning - Bādarasaṃpārāya is another name for the ninth Guṇasthāna called Anivṛttikaraṇa. Up to the ninth Guṇasthāna, the existence of Sthūla Kṣaya is present. Therefore, by the Antadīpaka Nyāya, this Guṇasthāna is also Bādarasaṃpārāya. Here, the word "Bādarasaṃpārāya" does not refer to this Guṇasthāna, so it is prohibited in the commentary, because twenty-two Pariṣahas are possible in Bādarasaṃpārāya, not in the ninth Guṇasthāna called Bādarasaṃpārāya. The reason is that the arising of Darśana-Mohaniya does not occur in this Guṇasthāna. There are three types of Darśana-Mohaniya. Among them, the arising of Samyaktva-Mohaniya is possible only up to the seventh Guṇasthāna, because Vedaka Samyaktva is present only up to this point. Therefore, here, Bādar1. Samstāḥ kveti Mu. 2. "Nisejjā jāyaṇākosō araī itthinaggayā. Sakkāro dāsaṇam mohā bāvīsā ceva rāgisu." - Pañcasam. Dvā. 4, Gā. 23 1 3. Akṣīṇāśayattvāt sarve - Ā., Di. 1, 2, Tā. 4  Samyameṣvanyatame sarve - Mu. Tā.

Page #460:
---------------------------
[340] Sarvarthasiddhi
[91148844844. It is said that the specific location of these Pariṣahas has been determined, but we do not know what the function of each nature is. Therefore, it is said here:
In the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa, there are Prajñā and Ajñāna Pariṣahas. ||13|| 8845. This is not right. What is not right here? It is acceptable that Ajñāna Pariṣaha arises in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa, but Prajñā Pariṣaha arises in its absence. How can it be in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa? It is said here: The Kṣayopaśamika Prajñā generates pride in the presence of other Jñānāvaraṇas, but not in the absence of all Avaraṇas. Therefore, it is acceptable that Prajñā Pariṣaha exists in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa. 8846. To further explain the specific nature of the other two Pariṣahas, it is said:
In the presence of Darśana-moha and Antarāya, there are Adarśana and Alābha Pariṣahas respectively. ||14|| 6847. The word "Yathāsaṅkhya" is related to this sūtra. In the presence of Darśana-moha, there is Adarśana Pariṣaha, and in the presence of Lābhāntarāya, there is Alābha Pariṣaha. It should be understood that all Pariṣahas are possible in the gross Kṣaya, i.e., Sāmpārāya.
6844. It is said: The specific location of these Pariṣahas has been determined, but we do not know what the function of each nature is. Therefore, it is said here:
In the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa, there are Prajñā and Ajñāna Pariṣahas. ||13||
$ 845. The doubt is that this is not right? Counter-doubt: What is not right here? Doubt: It is assumed that Ajñāna Pariṣaha arises in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa, but Prajñā Pariṣaha arises in its absence. Therefore, how can it be in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa? Solution: It is said here: The Kṣayopaśamika Prajñā generates pride in the presence of other Jñānāvaraṇas, but not in the absence of all Avaraṇas. Therefore, it is acceptable that Prajñā Pariṣaha exists in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa. - Special meaning: The meaning of Vikalpa is Śruta-jñāna. Therefore, as long as Śruta-jñāna exists, there is a Vikalpa like "I know more, this person does not know anything." Although the person who makes this kind of Vikalpa gains more knowledge due to the intense Kṣayopaśama of Jñānāvaraṇa karma, this Vikalpa exists only as long as Kṣayopaśamika jñāna exists, and Kṣayopaśamika jñāna is dependent on its arising. Therefore, the main cause of this kind of Vikalpa is said to be the arising of Jñānāvaraṇa karma. Many beings have the feeling that "I am a great sage, there is no one else who can match me," even though they have the arising of Moha. But this feeling arising from the arising of Moha is not considered here. Here, only the Vikalpa of considering a little knowledge as great knowledge due to one's own ignorance is considered. Thus, it is certain that there are two Pariṣahas, Prajñā and Ajñāna, in the presence of Jñānāvaraṇa.
846.. To further explain the specific nature of the other two Pariṣahas, the next sūtra is said:
In the presence of Darśana-moha and Antarāya, there are Adarśana and Alābha Pariṣahas respectively. ||14||
6 847. The word "Yathāsaṅkhya" is related to this sūtra. In the presence of Darśana-moha, there is Adarśana Pariṣaha, and in the presence of Lābhāntarāya, there is Alābha Pariṣaha.
_ Special meaning: The Samyaktvamohaṇīya nature is taken here from Darśana-moha. While it is arising, Cala, Mala, and Agādha defects arise. Having various Vikalpas about Āpta, Āgama, and objects while being Samyakta is the Cala defect. Just as waves arise in water due to the presence of air, even though the water is healthy, similarly, even though a Samyagdṛṣṭi person is 
Pariṣaha exists

Page #461:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

It is said that if there is one Pariṣaha due to the difference in the Mohaniya of the first, then how many Pariṣahas are there due to the difference in the second? Therefore, the next sūtra says:

**In the presence of Cāritra-moha, there are the Pariṣahas of Nāgnī, Arati, Strī, Niṣadyā, Ākrośa, Yācanā, and Satkāra-Puraskāra.** ||15||

**8848.** **Doubt:** The Pariṣahas of Nāgnī, etc., are due to the cause of Veda-udaya, etc., therefore, Mohodaya is said to be their cause. But how is the Niṣadyā Pariṣaha due to Mohodaya?

**Solution:** Even in that, because the avoidance of animal suffering is the main thing, it is considered to be caused by Mohodaya, because when Mohodaya occurs, the result in the form of animal suffering occurs.

**Special Meaning:** Further, Carya and Śayyā are said to be caused by Vedaniya, and here Niṣadyā is said to be caused by Mohaniya. All three Pariṣahas are of one category. Then what is the reason that Niṣadyā is said to be caused by Mohodaya? If the Pariṣahas of Carya and Śayyā are caused by Vedaniya, then why is this not considered to be caused by Vedaniya? This is a question whose answer is given in the Tīkā. There it is explained that the result in the form of animal suffering is due to Mohodaya, and in the Niṣadyā Pariṣaha, there is a main emphasis on conquering this type of result. This is the reason why Niṣadyā is considered to be caused by Cāritra-moha. It is true that with this intention, the Pariṣahas of Carya and Śayyā could also be considered to be caused by Mohodaya, but there, because of the main emphasis on the pain caused by thorns, etc., the above two Pariṣahas are said to be caused by Vedaniya. The meaning is that in Carya, Śayyā, and Niṣadyā, there is animal suffering and...

[ 341

Page #462:
---------------------------
## 342] Sarvarthasiddhi
[9116 8498849. To explain the nature of the remaining Pariṣahas, the sūtra says:
The remaining Pariṣahas are all dependent on Vedaniya. ||16|| 8850. The eleven Pariṣahas have been mentioned earlier. The remaining Pariṣahas are different from them and are dependent on Vedaniya. The word "भवन्ति" (exist) is implied in the sūtra. What are these remaining Pariṣahas? They are: Kṣudhā (hunger), Pipāsā (thirst), Śīta (cold), Uṣṇa (heat), Daṃśa-maśaka (bite of insects), Carya (movement), Śayyā (lying down), Vadh (killing), Roga (disease), Tṛṇa-sparśa (touch of grass), and Mala-pariṣaha (excrement).
8851. The sūtra says:
One to nineteen Pariṣahas can exist simultaneously in a single soul. ||17|| 8852. The word "आङ्" (Aṅ) here signifies possibility. This implies that nineteen Pariṣahas can also exist simultaneously in a single soul. How is this possible? The answer is: In a single soul, only one of the two Pariṣahas, Śīta and Uṣṇa, can exist at the same time, and only one of the three Pariṣahas, Śayyā, Niṣadyā, and Carya, can exist at the same time. This is because there is a conflict in having both Śīta and Uṣṇa, and all three of Śayyā, Niṣadyā, and Carya, existing simultaneously. When these three are excluded, the remaining Pariṣahas can exist simultaneously in a single soul, making a total of nineteen possibilities.
Now, someone might argue that there is also a conflict between Prajñā (wisdom) and Ajñāna (ignorance), so they cannot exist simultaneously. The answer is: In a single soul, Prajñā-pariṣaha is dependent on Śruta-jñāna (knowledge gained from scriptures), while Ajñāna-pariṣaha is dependent on Moha-nimitta (cause of delusion). Therefore, both can exist simultaneously. 
849. Now, to explain the specific nature of the remaining Pariṣahas, the next sūtra says:
All the remaining Pariṣahas exist in the presence of Vedaniya. ||16||
8850. Eleven Pariṣahas have been mentioned earlier. The remaining Pariṣahas are different from them and are dependent on Vedaniya. The word "भवन्ति" (exist) is implied in the sūtra. The question arises: What are these remaining Pariṣahas? The answer is: Kṣudhā (hunger), Pipāsā (thirst), Śīta (cold), Uṣṇa (heat), Daṃśa-maśaka (bite of insects), Carya (movement), Śayyā (lying down), Vadh (killing), Roga (disease), Tṛṇa-sparśa (touch of grass), and Mala-pariṣaha (excrement).
Explanation: These Pariṣahas arise due to their respective causes. For example, hunger arises due to lack of food in the body, thirst arises due to lack of water, cold arises due to the cold season, heat arises due to the hot season, bite of insects arises due to insects biting, pain while moving or lying down arises due to thorns, etc., killing arises due to someone killing, abuse arises due to someone abusing, disease arises due to disease in the body, pain due to touching grass arises due to touching grass, and excrement arises due to excrement in the body. The cause of these Pariṣahas is not the arising of Vedaniya karma, but the pain of hunger, thirst, etc., that arises due to these actions is the result of Vedaniya karma. This is the meaning that should be understood here.
851. The sūtra says:
One to nineteen Pariṣahas can exist simultaneously in a single soul. ||17||
8852. The word "आङ्" (Aṅ) here signifies possibility. This implies that nineteen Pariṣahas can also exist simultaneously in a single soul. The question arises: How is this possible? The answer is: In a single soul, only one of the two Pariṣahas, Śīta and Uṣṇa, can exist at the same time, and only one of the three Pariṣahas, Śayyā, Niṣadyā, and Carya, can exist at the same time. This is because there is a conflict in having both Śīta and Uṣṇa, and all three of Śayyā, Niṣadyā, and Carya, existing simultaneously. When these three are excluded, the remaining Pariṣahas can exist simultaneously in a single soul, making a total of nineteen possibilities.
Now, someone might argue that there is also a conflict between Prajñā (wisdom) and Ajñāna (ignorance), so they cannot exist simultaneously. The answer is: In a single soul, Prajñā-pariṣaha is dependent on Śruta-jñāna (knowledge gained from scriptures), while Ajñāna-pariṣaha is dependent on Moha-nimitta (cause of delusion). Therefore, both can exist simultaneously. 
1. Caryaṇām anyatam mu.
2. Kalpo boddhavyo.
Nanu ā., di. 2.

Page #463:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

[343]

There is no contradiction in saying that ignorance-based restraint is in relation to the absence of knowledge, while knowledge-based restraint is in relation to knowledge.

8853. It is said that the five causes of *sanvara* are: secrecy, council, dharma, non-expectation, and victory over restraint. Now, the cause of *sanvara* called *charitra* should be stated. Therefore, to show its different aspects, the following sutra is stated:

Samayika, Chhedopasthapana, Pariharavishuddhi, Sukshmasampray, and Yayakhyata are the five types of *charitra*. ||18||

8854. Doubt: It has been stated that *sanyama* is included in the ten types of *dharma*, and that is *charitra*. Therefore, mentioning it again is pointless?

Resolution: It is not pointless, because even though *charitra* is included in *dharma*, it is mentioned again at the end to show that it is the direct cause of liberation.

Samayika has been mentioned before.

Doubt: Where?

Resolution: While explaining the sutra "Digdeshanarthadandaviratisamayika".

It is of two types: fixed-time and unfixed-time. *Swadhyaya* etc. are fixed-time *samayika*, and *iryapatha* etc. are unfixed-time *samayika*.

The proper reaction, i.e., the acceptance of vows again, after the abandonment of the practice of *anarthaprabandha* caused by negligence, i.e., the abandonment of the non-vows like violence etc., is called *Chhedopasthapana charitra*. Or, the cessation of alternatives is called *Chhedopasthapana charitra*.

Cessation from killing living beings is called *parihar*. The *charitra* that has purity associated with it is called *Pariharavishuddhi charitra*.

The *charitra* in which *kṣaya* becomes extremely subtle is called *Sukshmasampray charitra*.

The *charitra* that is characterized by the expectation of the state of the self, as it is due to the complete pacification or destruction of all *mohaniya* karmas, is called *Athyakhyata charitra*.

It is called *Athyakhyata* because it is not attained before the pacification or destruction of *mohaniya* karmas, even though it has been stated by those who practice the previous *charitra*.

The word "atha" means "afterwards", so it means that it appears after the complete pacification or destruction of *mohaniya* karmas.

Page #464:
---------------------------
344)
**Sarvarthasiddha**
[9118 § 855
'Yayakhyatam' or 'Yathaatmasvabhavo'avasthitastathaivaakhyatatvat. 'Iti' shabda parisamaptau drashtavyaha. Tato yathaakhyatacharitrasakalakarmakshayaparisamaptribhavatiti jnapyate. Samayikaadinaamanupurvavachanmuttarottaraguṇaprakarsha ' khyapanartham kriyate.
8855. Aaha, uktam charitram. Tadanantare muddishttam yat 'tapasā nirjarā ca' iti tasya edānīm isalie use athākhyāt कहते हैं. 'Ath' shabda 'anantare' arthavarti hone se samasat mohaniya karmake kshaya ya upashamake anantar vah aavirbhut hota hai yah ukt kathankā tatparya hai. Athava is charitrakā ek nāma yathākhyāt bhi hai. Jis prakar ātmākā svabhāv avasthit hai usi prakar yah kahā gayā hai, isalie ise yathākhyāt कहते हैं. Sūtramen āyā huā 'iti' shabda parisamapti arth men jānana chahie. Isalie isase yathākhyāt charitra se samasat karmoke kshayaki parisamapti hoti hai yah jānā jātā hai. Uttaroत्तर गुणोंke prakarshakā khyapan karneke lie samayik, chhedosthāpanā ityadi kramese inakā nāmnirdesh kiyā hai.
Visheshārtha-charitra yah ek prakarakā hokar bhi usake panch bhed vivakshavisheshse kiye gaye hain. Samayik men sarvasavadyaki nivrittirūp parināma ki mukhyatā hai. Chhedopasthāpanā men charitra lagane vāle doshonke parimārjanaki mukhyatā hai. Parihārvisuddhi charitra aise sanayatke hotā hai jat tis varshatak grihasth avasthā men sukhapūrvak bitakar sanayat hone par tirthankar pādamūlaki paricharyā karte hue āth varshatak pratyākhyānapūrv kā adhyayan kartā hai. Yah jantuonki raksha kaise karni chahie, ve kis dravyake nimittse kis kshetra aur kis kālmen visheshatah utpann hote hain, jīvonki yoni aur janm kitne prakar ke hote hain ityadi bātonko bhale prakar jānata hai. Yah pramādarahit, mahābalashāli, karmoki mahānirjarā karne vāla aur ati 'dushkar charyākā anusthān karne vāla hotā hai. Tatha yah tinon sandhyākālonko chhoḍakar do kos gaman karne vāla hotā hai. In sab kāranon se is sanayatke aiso samarthya utpann hoti hai jiske balase yah anya jīvonko bādha pahunchāye binā charyā karnemen samarth hotā hai. Sūkshmasāmprāya aur yathākhyāt charitrakā arth spasht hi hai. Is prakar vivakshabhedse ek charitra panch prakarakā kahā gayā hai.
Inse se samayik aur chhedopasthāpanāki jghanya visuddhilabbdhi sabase alp hoti hai. Isase parihārvisuddhi charitrakī jghanya visuddhilabbdhi anantguṇī hoti hai. Isase isiki utkrisht visuddhilabbdhi anantguṇī hoti hai. Isase samayik aur chhedopasthāpanāki utkrisht visuddhilabbdhi anantguṇī hoti hai. Isase sūkshmasāmprāya charitrakī jghanya visuddhilabbdhi anantguṇī hain. Isase isaki utkrisht visuddhilabbdhi anantguṇī hoti hai. Isase yathākhyāt charitrakī visuddhilabbdhi ek prakaraki hokar bhi anantguṇī hoti hai. Yahi kāran hai ki sūtramen samayik chhedopasthāpanā ityadi kramese in panchonka nāmnirdesh kiyā hai. Pahale das prakarke dharmakā nirdesh karte samay sanayamdharma kah āye hain, isalie charitrakā antarbhāv usamen ho jāneke kāran yahān isakā alag se kathana karneki āvashyakta nahin hoti fir bhi samasat karmakā kshaya charitra se hota hai yah dikhāneke lie yahān charitrakā prithak rūpse vyākhyān kiyā hai.
8855. Kahte hain, charitrakā kathana kiyā. Sanvarake hetuon kā nirdesh karneke bād 'tapasā nirjarā ca' yah sūtra kahā hai, isalie yahān tapkā vidhān karana chahie, atah yahān 1. - karshajñāpanārtham mu. 1

Page #465:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

**The practice of austerities is described here. It is of two types: external and internal. Each of these is further divided into six types. The text first explains the external austerities.**

**External austerities are of six types:**

1. **Anashan (fasting):** This is done without expecting any visible results, for the sake of attaining self-control, eliminating attachment, destroying karma, and achieving meditation and knowledge.
2. **Avamoudarya (simple living):** This is done to maintain self-control, subdue negative tendencies, cultivate contentment, and achieve the effortless practice of self-study and other virtues.
3. **Vrittiparisankhyan (limiting activities):** This involves limiting one's thoughts and activities to essential needs, especially for a mendicant, to avoid unnecessary mental distractions and anxieties.
4. **Rasaparitvag (renunciation of rich foods):** This is done to overcome pride in the senses, conquer sleep, and achieve the effortless practice of self-study and other virtues.
5. **Vivikta-shayyasan (solitary dwelling):** This involves choosing a secluded place free from disturbances, for the sake of practicing self-control, celibacy, self-study, meditation, and other virtues.
6. **Kayaklesha (physical austerities):** This includes practices like sunbathing, dwelling under trees, sleeping without a bed, and engaging in various forms of physical hardship. These are done to cultivate endurance, overcome attachment to pleasure, and enhance the effectiveness of teachings and spiritual practices.

**What is the difference between Pariksha (endurance) and Kayaklesha (physical austerities)?**

Pariksha is endurance that arises spontaneously, while Kayaklesha is self-inflicted physical hardship.

**Why are these austerities considered external?**

They are considered external because they depend on external objects and are visible to others.

**The text now explains the internal austerities.**

Page #466:
---------------------------
##  Internal Penance (346)

**[9120 $ 858  Prāyaścittavinayavaiyāvṛttyasvādhāyavyutsargadhānānyuttaram ॥20॥]**

Prāyaścitta, Vinaya, Vaiyāvṛttya, Svādhyāya, Vyutsarga, and Dhyāna are the six types of internal penance.  ||20||

**[8858. Kathamasyābhyantaratvam? Manonīyamanārthatvāt. Pramāvadoṣaparihāraḥprāyaścittam. Pūjyeṣvādaro vinayaḥ. Kāyacheṣṭayā dravyāntareṇa copāsanaṁ vaiyāvṛttyam. Jñānabhāvanālasyatyāgaḥ svādhyāyaḥ. Ātmātmīyasankalpatyāgo vyutsargaḥ. Cittavīkṣepatyāgo dhyānam.]**

**[8858. How is this internal penance?** Because it is for the regulation of the mind.  Prāyaścitta is the removal of faults arising from negligence.  Vinaya is respect for the venerable.  Vaiyāvṛttya is worship through bodily actions or other substances.  Svādhyāya is the abandonment of laziness and the cultivation of knowledge.  Vyutsarga is the abandonment of the thought of self and mine.  Dhyāna is the abandonment of mental distractions.

**[8859. Tabhedapratipādanārthamahā**
**Navacaturdaśapancadvibhedā yathākramaṁ prāradhyānāt ॥21॥]**

**[8859. To explain their distinctions, the next sūtra says:**
There are nine, four, ten, five, and two distinctions of the internal penances, in order, beginning with Prāyaścitta. ||21||

**[8860. 'Yathākramam' iti vacanānnavabhedaṁ prāyaścittam, vinayaścaturvidhaḥ, vaiyāvṛttyaṁ daśavidham, svādhyāyaḥ pañcavidhaḥ, dvībhedavyutsarga ityabhisambadhyate. 'Prāgdhyānāt' iti vacanaṁ dhyānasya bahuvaktvyatvātpaścādvakṣyata iti.]**

**[8860. The word 'yathākramam' indicates that:** Prāyaścitta has nine distinctions, Vinaya has four, Vaiyāvṛttya has ten, Svādhyāya has five, and Vyutsarga has two.  The word 'prāgdhyānāt' indicates that Dhyāna will be discussed later, as there is much to be said about it.

**[8861. Ādyasya bhedasvarūpanirjñānārthamahā**
**Pālocanapratikramaṇatadu bhayavivekavyu tsargatapaschchedaparihāropasthāpanāḥ ॥22॥]**

**[8861. To explain the nature of the distinctions of the first internal penance, the next sūtra says:**
Pālocanā, Pratikramaṇa, Tadubhaya, Viveka, Vyutsarga, Tapa, Chheda, Parihāra, and Upastāpanā are the nine types of Prāyaścitta. ||22||

**[8862. Tatra gurave pramādanivedanaṁ daśadoṣavijitamālocanam. Mithyāduṣkṛtābhidhānādabhivyaktapratikriyaṁ pratikramaṇam. [Tadu bhaya] samsarge sati viśodhanāttadu bhayam. Samsaktānnapānop**

**[8862. There, Pālocanā is the confession of one's negligence to the guru, having avoided the ten faults.  Pratikramaṇa is the expression of one's reaction by saying to the guru, "My fault is false."  Tadubhaya Prāyaścitta is the purification of faults when there is a connection between Pālocanā and Pratikramaṇa.  Viveka Prāyaścitta is the separation of food, drink, and utensils that have been in contact with the senses.** 

**1.  Reṇa vopa- tā.। 2. Dvīvidho vyuts- । 3. -locanam. Ākapīya aṇumāṇīya jaṁ diḷaṁ bādara ca suhama ca. Chah saddāuliyaṁ bahjaṇa avvata sassevi.। iti daśa doṣāḥ. Mithyā- mu.।**

**[1.  Reṇa vopa- tā.। 2. Dvīvidho vyuts- । 3. -locanam. Ākapīya aṇumāṇīya jaṁ diḷaṁ bādara ca suhama ca. Chah saddāuliyaṁ bahjaṇa avvata sassevi.। iti daśa doṣāḥ. Mithyā- mu.।]**

**[1.  Reṇa vopa- tā.। 2. Dvīvidho vyuts- । 3. -locanam. Ākapīya aṇumāṇīya jaṁ diḷaṁ bādara ca suhama ca. Chah saddāuliyaṁ bahjaṇa avvata sassevi.। iti daśa doṣāḥ. Mithyā- mu.।]**

**[1.  Reṇa vopa- tā.। 2. Dvīvidho vyuts- । 3. -locanam. Ākapīya aṇumāṇīya jaṁ diḷaṁ bādara ca suhama ca. Chah saddāuliyaṁ bahjaṇa avvata sassevi.। iti daśa doṣāḥ. Mithyā- mu.।]**

**[1.  Reṇa vopa- tā.। 2. Dvīvidho vyuts- । 3. -locanam. Ākapīya aṇumāṇīya jaṁ diḷaṁ bādara ca suhama ca. Chah saddāuliyaṁ bahjaṇa avvata sassevi.। iti daśa doṣāḥ. Mithyā- mu.।]**

**[1.  Reṇa vopa- tā.। 2. Dvīvidho vyuts- । 3. -locanam. Ākapīya aṇumāṇīya jaṁ diḷaṁ bādara ca suhama

Page #467:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine:  

**[347]  The Distinction of  *Karana* (Cause) and Other Divisions**

* ***Vyutsarga*:**  The cause of *Kayotsarga* (abandonment of the body) and other such practices.
* ***Tapa*:**  The cause of *Anashana* (fasting), *Avamoudarya* (humility), and other such practices.
* ***Chheda*:**  The cause of the breaking of vows (like *Pravrajya*) by day, fortnight, month, etc.
* ***Parihara*:**  The cause of the abandonment of vows (like *Pravrajya*) by fortnight, month, etc., and keeping oneself away from the community.
* ***Upasthapana*:**  The cause of the re-initiation into vows.

**Explanation:**

Here, nine types of *Prayaschitta* (atonement) are mentioned. The word *Prayaschitta* means "purification" or "atonement." It is the act of purifying oneself from the defilement of karma. 

These nine types of *Prayaschitta* are the means by which a *Sadhu* (Jain monk) purifies himself from his faults.

**The First Type: *Aalocana* (Confession)**

* *Aalocana* is done without the ten faults.
* The ten faults are:
    1. ***Upakaran* Fault:**  Providing *Upakaran* (material support) to a *Sadhu* with the thought that he will receive a lesser *Prayaschitta* in return.
    2. ***Prakriti* Fault:**  Claiming to be weak or unable to perform *Anashana* (fasting) or other practices, and then blaming the *Sadhu* for giving a lesser *Prayaschitta*.
    3. ***Mayaachar* Fault:**  Hiding other unseen faults and confessing only the visible ones.
    4. ***Sthula* Fault:**  Being indifferent to knowing one's own faults due to laziness or carelessness.
    5. ***Pancharcha* Fault:**  Hiding major faults due to fear of severe *Prayaschitta* and confessing only minor faults.
    6. ***Guru* Fault:**  Worshiping the *Guru* with the thought of what *Prayaschitta* will be given for a particular fault.
    7. ***Purva* Fault:**  Confessing a fault due to the influence of other *Sadhus* who have confessed similar faults during *Paakshik* (fortnightly) or *Chaturmasik* (four-month) practices.
    8. ***Shaka* Fault:**  Doubting the validity of the *Prayaschitta* given by the *Guru* and questioning its scriptural basis in front of other *Sadhus*.
    9. ***Prayojana* Fault:**  Confessing a fault to a fellow *Sadhu* for a specific purpose and receiving *Prayaschitta* from him.
    10. ***Chhipana* Fault:**  Hiding one's fault by claiming that it is similar to the fault of another *Sadhu* and that the *Prayaschitta* given to the other *Sadhu* is also applicable to oneself.

* Any *Prayaschitta* done with these ten faults is not fruitful.

**Other Names for the Ten Faults:**

* *Aakampit*
* *Anumanit*
* *Drishta*
* *Badar*
* *Sookshma*
* *Chhanna*
* *Shabdaakulit*
* *Bahujan*
* *Avyakt*
* *Tatsevi*

**The Second Type: *Pratikramna* (Repentance)**

* *Pratikramna* is the act of confessing one's fault with the intention of making it false.
* This is done by the disciple.
* When *Pratikramna* is done with *Aalocana* by the *Guru*, it is called *Tadu-bhay* (both).

**The Third Type: *Tadu-bhay* (Both)**

* This is the third type of *Prayaschitta*.

**Other Types of *Prayaschitta*:**

* The remaining types of *Prayaschitta* are named according to their nature.

**Ten Types of *Prayaschitta* in *Mulaachar* (Basic Conduct)**

* *Aalocana*
* *Pratikramna*
* *Tadu-bhay*
* *Viveka*
* *Vyutsarga*
* *Tapa*
* *Chheda*
* ***Mula* (Original)**
* *Parihara*
* *Shraddhan*

**Explanation by the Commentator:**

* The commentator interprets *Mula* as equivalent to *Upasthapana* (re-initiation).
* *Shraddhan* is a type of *Prayaschitta* for mental faults, where one confesses the fault with the intention of making it false.

**Footnotes:**

1. *Pravrajya* is the vow of renunciation.
2. *Parivarjaniya* is something that should be abandoned.

Page #468:
---------------------------
[348] Sarvarthasiddhau
[9123 6 8638863. To explain the different types of Vinaya, the sutra says:
Jnanavinaya, Darshanavinaya, Charitravinaya and Upcharavinaya. ||23|| 8864. The word 'Vinaya' is related to this chapter. There are four types of Vinaya: Jnanavinaya, Darshanavinaya, Charitravinaya and Upcharavinaya. Jnanavinaya is the practice of acquiring knowledge, studying it and remembering it with great respect for the sake of liberation. Darshanavinaya is the faith in the truth of the scriptures without any doubts or flaws. Charitravinaya is the focus of the mind on the right conduct. Upcharavinaya is the practice of standing up, following behind and bowing to the Acharya and other respected individuals in their presence. It also includes bowing to them with body, speech and mind, praising their qualities and remembering them in their absence.
8865. To explain the different types of Vaiyaavrutya, the sutra says:
Acharya, Upadhyaya, Tapasvi, Shaiksha, Glana, Gana, Kula, Sangh, Sadhu and Manojna. ||24||
8866. There are ten types of Vaiyaavrutya because its subject matter is of ten types. For example, Acharya-Vaiyaavrutya and Upadhyaya-Vaiyaavrutya, etc. The one who observes the vows is called Acharya. The one who teaches the scriptures for liberation is called Upadhyaya. The one who practices great fasts and other austerities is called Tapasvi. The one who is learning is called Shaiksha. The one whose body is afflicted by diseases, etc. is called Glana. The lineage of elders is called Gana. The group of disciples of the initiating Acharya is called Kula. The assembly of Shramans of the four castes is called Sangh. The one who has been a monk for a long time is called Sadhu. The Sadhu who is acceptable to the people is called Manojna. When these people suffer from diseases, hardships, or false beliefs, etc., they should be helped by physical means or by other material means. 1. Tattvatascha - Mu.. 2. Ranti Sasy - A., Di. 1, Di. 2, Ta., Na.। 3. 'Upeyatyadhiyate tasmad u. padhyayaḥ.' -Pa. M, Bha. 3, 3, 111 4. Sansatyayaḥ Mu.। 5. Chaturvarnyashra - Mu.।

Page #469:
---------------------------
-91268 870] Chapter Nine
[349 The practice of *vaiyāvṛttya* is done for the sake of attaining *samādhi*, the absence of doubt, and the expression of compassion through preaching. 5867. To explain the different types of *svādhyāya*, the sūtra says:
*vācanā prachchanā anuprekṣā āmnāya dharma upadeśāḥ* ||25|| 8868. *Vācanā* is the giving of the text, the meaning, or both without fault. *Prachchanā* is questioning to remove doubt or to strengthen a firm belief. *Anuprekṣā* is mental contemplation of the meaning that has been understood. *Āmnāya* is the repetition of the text with correct pronunciation. *Dharma upadeśa* is the practice of *dharma kathā* and other such things. What is the purpose of these five types of *svādhyāya*? The purpose is to increase wisdom, to make one's resolve firm, to attain supreme emotion, to increase one's *tapas*, and to purify one's conduct, and so on. 8869. To explain the different types of *vyutsarga* *tapas*, the sūtra says:
*bāhyābhyantaropaḍhyoḥ* ||26|| 8870. *Vyutsarjana* is *vyutsarga*, which means renunciation. It is of two types: renunciation of external *upaḍhis* and renunciation of internal *upaḍhis*. External *upaḍhis* are things like wealth, grain, and other things that are not one with the self. Internal *upaḍhis* are mental states like anger. Renunciation of the body for a fixed period or for life is also called renunciation of internal *upaḍhis*. What is the purpose of this? The purpose is to attain non-attachment, fearlessness, and the transcendence of the desire for life, and so on. To practice *vaiyāvṛttya* is to practice *tapas*. This is done to attain *samādhi*, to remove doubt, and to express compassion through preaching.
8867. To explain the different types of *svādhyāya*, the sūtra says:
*vācanā, prachchanā, anuprekṣā, āmnāya, and dharma upadeśa* are the five types of *svādhyāya* ||25||
8868. *Vācanā* is the giving of the text, the meaning, or both without fault. *Prachchanā* is questioning to remove doubt or to strengthen a firm belief. *Anuprekṣā* is mental contemplation of the meaning that has been understood. *Āmnāya* is the repetition of the text with correct pronunciation. *Dharma upadeśa* is the practice of *dharma kathā* and other such things. The question arises: why are these five types of *svādhyāya* practiced? The answer is: to increase wisdom, to make one's resolve firm, to attain supreme emotion, to increase one's *tapas*, and to purify one's conduct, and so on.
8869. To explain the different types of *vyutsarga* *tapas*, the sūtra says:
Renunciation of external and internal *upaḍhis* are the two types of *vyutsarga* ||26||
8870. *Vyutsarjana* is *vyutsarga*, which means renunciation. It is of two types: renunciation of external *upaḍhis* and renunciation of internal *upaḍhis*. External *upaḍhis* are things like wealth, grain, and other things that are not one with the self. Internal *upaḍhis* are mental states like anger. Renunciation of the body for a fixed period or for life is also called renunciation of internal *upaḍhis*. The purpose of this is to attain non-attachment, fearlessness, and the transcendence of the desire for life, and so on.
It is important to note that the five great vows include the vow of non-possession, the ten *dharmas* include the *dharma* of renunciation, and the nine types of *prāyaścitta* include a *prāyaścitta* called *vyutsarga*. In this context, why is *vyutsarga* *tapas* mentioned separately? This seems redundant, as it would be repeating the same thing. The answer is that the vow of non-possession in the five great vows refers to the renunciation of *upaḍhis* related to household life. 1. -*mādhȳyān*  mu.। 2.  *vyaktārtham* ā., di. 1, di. 2, nā. ।

Page #470:
---------------------------
## 350] Sarvarthasiddhi
[9127 88718871.  Although much has been said about dhyana (meditation) and its various classifications, it is now time to discuss its distinctions.  However, we will move beyond this and proceed to define the nature, practitioner, and duration of dhyana.
The restraint of thought on a single object, for a period of antarmūhūrta, is dhyana, for one who possesses the uttama samhanana. ||27||
8872. The three types of samhanana, namely vajrarṣabha-nārāca-samhanana, vajra-nārāca-samhanana, and nārāca-samhanana, are considered uttama (excellent). All three are means to dhyana, but the first one is the means to moksha (liberation). One who possesses these uttama samhananas is called an uttama-samhanana-vala. The word "agra" refers to the "mouth" or "point of focus". One who has a single agra is called ekāgra. When the mind is distracted by various objects, it becomes agitated. Restraining it from all other objects and focusing it on a single object is called ekāgra-cintā-nirodha. This explains the nature of dhyana. Mūhūrta is a unit of time. Antarmūhūrta refers to a period within a mūhūrta. The phrase "antarmūhūrta-āt" defines the duration. After this period, ekāgra-cintā becomes difficult to maintain.
**Doubt:** If dhyana is the restraint of thought, and restraint is the absence of thought, then dhyana would be like the horns of a donkey, i.e., non-existent.
**Resolution:** This is not a valid objection. Dhyana is considered non-existent only in relation to the cessation of other thoughts. It is considered existent because it is directed towards its object.  Absence is a different state of being, and the existence of absence as a property of an object is established by various arguments like the presence of a supporting factor, the absence of a contradictory factor, etc.
Alternatively, the word "nirodha" does not refer to the cessation of thought. What then does it refer to? It refers to the restraint of karma. "Nirodha" means "restraint". Thought is the main cause of karma. The main aspect of tyaga-dharma (the virtue of renunciation) is the reduction of attachment to objects like food. The main aspect of vyutsarga-prāyaścitta (atonement through renunciation) is the purification of the faults that arise from attachment to possessions. The main aspect of vyutsarga-tapa (austerity through renunciation) is the renunciation of attachment to external factors like desires and internal factors like the body and mind. Therefore, there is no repetition of the same point.
6871. The various types of dhyana that have been discussed are now ready to be explained. However, we will move beyond this and proceed to define the nature, practitioner, and duration of dhyana.
The restraint of thought on a single object, for a period of antarmūhūrta, is dhyana, for one who possesses the uttama samhanana. ||27||
8872. The three types of samhanana, namely vajrarṣabha-nārāca-samhanana, vajra-nārāca-samhanana, and nārāca-samhanana, are considered uttama (excellent). All three are means to dhyana, but the first one is the means to moksha (liberation). One who possesses these uttama samhananas is called an uttama-samhanana-vala. The word "agra" refers to the "mouth" or "point of focus". One who has a single agra is called ekāgra. When the mind is distracted by various objects, it becomes agitated. Restraining it from all other objects and focusing it on a single object is called ekāgra-cintā-nirodha. This explains the nature of dhyana. Mūhūrta is a unit of time. Antarmūhūrta refers to a period within a mūhūrta. The phrase "antarmūhūrta-āt" defines the duration. After this period, ekāgra-cintā becomes difficult to maintain.
**Doubt:** If dhyana is the restraint of thought, and restraint is the absence of thought, then dhyana would be like the horns of a donkey, i.e., non-existent.
**Resolution:** This is not a valid objection. Dhyana is considered non-existent only in relation to the cessation of other thoughts. It is considered existent because it is directed towards its object.  Absence is a different state of being, and the existence of absence as a property of an object is established by various arguments like the presence of a supporting factor, the absence of a contradictory factor, etc.
Alternatively, the word "nirodha" does not refer to the cessation of thought. What then does it refer to? It refers to the restraint of karma. "Nirodha" means "restraint". Thought is the main cause of karma. The main aspect of tyaga-dharma (the virtue of renunciation) is the reduction of attachment to objects like food. The main aspect of vyutsarga-prāyaścitta (atonement through renunciation) is the purification of the faults that arise from attachment to possessions. The main aspect of vyutsarga-tapa (austerity through renunciation) is the renunciation of attachment to external factors like desires and internal factors like the body and mind. Therefore, there is no repetition of the same point.
1. "Dhyanam nirviṣayam manaḥ." -Sāṁ. Sū. 6, 25 1 2.  Durdhara-tvāt. Cintāyā ni-• tā. nā. ।

Page #471:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

[351] Nirodha and Chintan Nirodha. This means that the knowledge which shines like a steady flame of fire is Dhyana. 
8873. To show the different types of Dhyana, the next Sutra says:
Aarta, Raudra, Dharmya, and Shukla are the four types of Dhyana. ||28||
8874. The word Aarta is derived from either 'Rta' or 'Ati'. 'Rta' means sorrow and 'Ati' means 'ardana ati', which means to cause pain. What is present in 'Rta' or 'Ati' is Aarta. Raudra means cruel intention. Its karma or what happens in it is Raudra. Dharma has been explained earlier. What is associated with Dharma is Dharmya. What is associated with the quality of purity is Shukla. This four-fold Dhyana is divided into two parts, because it is of two types based on the difference between Prashsta and Aprashsta. What causes the flow of Papa is Aprashsta, and what is capable of burning karma is Prashsta.
8875. If you ask what that is, the next Sutra says:
Among them, the two Dhyanas, Para, i.e., the last ones, are the cause of Moksha. ||29||
8876. Para means the last and the ultimate. The last one is Shukla Dhyana. Because it is close to it, Dharmya Dhyana is also called Para. Since the Sutra uses the dual form 'Pare', it also includes the secondary meaning. From the statement 'Para, i.e., Dharmya and Shukla, are the cause of Moksha', it is implied that the previous ones, i.e., Aarta and Raudra, are the cause of Samsara. This is because there is no third objective besides Moksha and Samsara.
8877. Among them, Aarta Dhyana is of four types. To explain the characteristics of the first type, the next Sutra says:

Page #472:
---------------------------
## 3521
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[9133 § 878
**The constant remembrance of something unpleasant when it is present is the first type of *ārt* meditation.** ||30|| 8878. *Amanōjña* means unpleasant. Poison, thorns, enemies, weapons, etc., are called *amanōjña* because they cause harm. When they are present, the thought, "How can they not be mine?" and the constant worry and planning about them is called the first *ārt* meditation.
8879. To explain the characteristics of the second type, the sūtra says:
**The opposite of what is pleasant.** ||31||
8880. What is the opposite? It is what was said before. This means that when something pleasant, such as one's son, wife, or wealth, is lost, the constant worry and planning about getting it back is the second *ārt* meditation.
8881. To explain the characteristics of the third type, the sūtra says:
**And pain.** ||32||
8882. The word *vedanā* refers to both pleasure and pain, but here, because the topic is *ārt* meditation, it refers to pain. When there is pain caused by wind, etc., the thought, "How can this pain not be mine?" and the constant worry and planning about getting rid of it is called the third *ārt* meditation.
8883. To explain the characteristics of the fourth type, the sūtra says:
**And the cause.** ||33||
8884. The constant worry and planning of a person who is eager for enjoyment about getting things in the future

Page #473:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

[333] The fourth type of *ārt* meditation is called *nidāna*. [885] If you ask who is the owner of this four-fold *ārt* meditation, then it is said:
It is found in *avirat*, *deśavirat*, and *pramattasamyata* beings. [34]

[8886] *Avirat* are those who are not restrained in their *samyagdṛṣṭi* (right faith) and are not yet on the path of liberation. *Deśavirat* are those who are restrained in their *samyagdṛṣṭi* but are not yet fully liberated. *Pramattasamyata* are those who are engaged in actions with fifteen types of *pramāda* (negligence). Among these, *avirat* and *deśavirat* experience all four types of *ārt* meditation because they are affected by the consequences of their unrestrained actions. *Pramattasamyata* beings, however, may experience only *nidāna* and not the other three types of *ārt* meditation, because the intensity of their *pramāda* is very high.

[8887] The *ārt* meditation has been explained through its definition and other aspects. Now, to determine the definition, cause, and owner of the second type of meditation, the next sūtra says:
Continuous contemplation on violence, falsehood, stealing, and sensual pleasures is called *raudradhyāna*. It is found in *avirat* and *deśavirat* beings. [35]

[8888] The characteristics of violence, etc., have been mentioned earlier. They are the causes for the arising of *raudradhyāna*. This indicates the cause. The word "memory-association" ( *smṛtisamanvāhāra* ) is connected to these causes of violence, etc., because it follows the indication of the cause. For example, "memory-association of violence", etc. This *raudradhyāna* should be understood to be present in *avirat* and *deśavirat* beings.

**Doubt:** How can *raudradhyāna* be present in *deśavirat* beings, when it is said to be present in *avirat* beings?

**Resolution:** It is possible for *deśavirat* beings to experience *raudradhyāna* as well, due to the influence of violence, etc., or because they are dependent on wealth, etc., for their survival. However, the *raudradhyāna* experienced by *deśavirat* beings is...

Page #474:
---------------------------
[354]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[9136 $ 889: The cause of Naraka and other bad destinies is not there, because of the power of Samyagdarshan. But for the restrained, it does not happen at all, because at its beginning, restraint falls away.
$ 889: It is said, "The two meditations are the cause of liberation." There, the distinction, nature, and master of the first meditation, which is the cause of liberation, should be indicated. Therefore, the next verse says -
Agyna, Apaya, Vipaka, and Sansthana, the contemplation of these is Dharmyadhyana. ||36|| $ 890. Vichyana is Vichya. Vichya, Viveka, and Vicharana are synonyms. The mutual duality of Agyna, Apaya, Vipaka, and Sansthana, combined with the word Vichya, forms a Shashthitattpurusha compound, and thus the word "Agynapaya Vipaka Sansthana Vichya" is formed. The word "Smritisamanvaharah" is carried forward. And it is related to each one. For example, Smritisamanvaharah for Agynavichya, etc. The explanation is as follows - In the absence of the teacher, due to one's own dull intellect, due to the rise of karma, and due to the subtlety of the objects, in the absence of reason and illustration in support of the truth, by taking the Agam, which is ordained by the Sarvagna, as evidence, "This is the way, because the Jinas are not otherwise," thus, the determination of the meaning through faith in the profound object is Agynavichya Dharmyadhyana. Or, knowing the truth of the objects oneself, and wishing to teach it to others, the continuous contemplation of reason, nay, and evidence, in order to support the truth without contradicting one's own doctrine, is called Agynavichya, because it reveals the command of the Sarvagna. Like a blind man born, Mithyadrishti beings are turned away from the path ordained by the Sarvagna, they do not know the right path, and therefore they abandon the seekers of liberation from afar. Thus, the contemplation of the fall from the right path is Apaya Vichya Dharmyadhyana. Or, how will these beings be freed from Mithyadarshan, Mithyagyan, and Mithyacharitra? This continuous contemplation is Apaya Vichya Dharmyadhyana. The contemplation of karma, such as Jnanavarana, etc., in terms of dravya, kshetra, kala, bhava, bhava, pratyaya, phala, and anubhava, is...
]

Page #475:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine: 

**[355] Analysis of Karma Results:** This chapter discusses the nature of the universe and its inhabitants, and how to cultivate mindfulness. The nature of Dharma, characterized by qualities like supreme forgiveness, has been explained. Therefore, one should understand the four types of Dharma-based mindfulness, which are practiced by beings who are: 

* **Avirata:** Those who are constantly engaged in Dharma.
* **Deshavirata:** Those who are free from attachment to worldly things.
* **Pramatta Samyata:** Those who are mindful but still prone to distractions.
* **Aprammatta Samyata:** Those who are completely free from distractions and fully mindful.

**Dharma-based mindfulness** is the conscious awareness of the karmic results experienced due to the factors of substance, field, time, birth, and motivation. It also involves the continuous contemplation of the nature and structure of the universe. 

**Dharma-based mindfulness** is a state of mind that arises from the right understanding of the true nature of reality. It is characterized by detachment from the world, the body, and worldly pleasures. This detachment is cultivated through the practice of **Samyak Drishti** (right faith). Dharma-based mindfulness is infused with the qualities of supreme forgiveness and other virtues, hence the name. 

**Four types of Dharma-based mindfulness:**

* **Agyna Vichaya:** This type of mindfulness helps in understanding the true nature of reality.
* **Apay Vichaya:** This type of mindfulness helps in developing detachment from the world, the body, and worldly pleasures.
* **Vipak Vichaya:** This type of mindfulness helps in understanding the intricacies of karmic results and their causes.
* **Sansthan Vichaya:** This type of mindfulness helps in understanding the structure and functioning of the universe.

**The nature of Vipak Vichaya:**

The discussion of karma results in relation to substance, field, and time, as mentioned in the original commentary, emphasizes that the ripening of karma, leading to the experience of various bodies and states of being, does not occur in isolation. It requires the presence of other factors, such as substance, field, etc. 

**Example of substance as a factor:**

Imagine a person who is happily playing with their children. Suddenly, the roof of their house collapses, causing them injury and pain. The collapse of the roof is the substance that triggers the experience of pain. This pain is a result of the ripening of the karmic potential for suffering, which is activated by the external factor of the collapsing roof. 

**Time as a factor:**

Time plays a role in the ripening of karma in two ways:

1. **The specific time frame for the ripening of a particular karma:** For example, the ripening of the karmic potential for happiness and pleasure typically lasts for six months. After this period, the potential for suffering and sorrow begins to ripen.
2. **The time frame within which the ripening of karma can be altered:** If, within the six-month period, an event occurs that contradicts the ripening of happiness and pleasure, the ripening process can be altered. 

**Example of time as a factor:**

Imagine a person who is traveling fearlessly to a new land. However, they find themselves in a dangerous forest at night, where there are wild animals and no safe place to rest. If it were daytime, they would not be afraid. But because it is night, they experience fear. This fear is a result of the ripening of the karmic potential for fear, which is triggered by the external factor of night time. 

**Conclusion:**

The ripening of karma is a complex process that is influenced by various factors, including substance, field, and time. Understanding these factors is crucial for cultivating Dharma-based mindfulness and achieving liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

Page #476:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**[356]**

**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[91368 890]

When **Asata**, **Arati**, **Shoka** and **Bhaya** karmas begin to arise and be stimulated, it is called **Kalanimittak** arising. Similarly, one should understand **Kshetra**, **Bhava** and **Bhavanimittak** arising and stimulation. The experience of **Kalaprapta** karma particles is called **Uday** (arising), and bringing the karma particles located outside the **Udayavali** into the **Udayavali** through a special **Virya** (energy) with or without **Kashaya** (passions) and experiencing them along with the **Udayaprapta** karma particles is called **Udirana** (stimulation). Thus, the experience of karma particles is taken into account in both **Uday** and **Udirana**. If there is a difference between them, it is between **Kalaprapta** and **Akalaprapta** particles. **Uday** involves **Kalaprapta** karma particles, and **Udirana** involves **Akalaprapta** karma particles. The general rule is that where the **Uday** of a karma occurs, its **Udirana** must also occur. However, the specific characteristics of each are described here:

* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Mithyatva** occur in the **Mithyatva** Gunasthan. A special characteristic is that in the final **Avalikaal** of a **Jiva** who is facing **Upshama** **Samyaktva**, there is no **Udirana** of **Mithyatva**, only its **Uday**.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Ekendriya** jati, **Dwiindriya** jati, **Triindriya** jati, **Chaturindriya** jati, **Atap**, **Sthavar**, **Sukshma**, **Aparayapta** and **Sadharan** occur only in the **Mithyatva** Gunasthan, not beyond.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Anantanu bandhi** Chatushk occur in the first two Gunasthanas, not beyond.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Samyamithyatva** occur only in the third Gunasthan, not elsewhere.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Apratyakhyan** Chatushk, **Narakagati**, **Devagati**, **Vaikriyik** body, **Vaikriyik** limbs, **Durbhag**, **Anadeya** and **Ayashaskiti** occur only up to the fourth Gunasthan, not beyond.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Narakay** and **Devayuk** occur only up to the fourth Gunasthan, not beyond. Only at the time of death, in the final **Avalikaal**, there is no **Udirana**.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of the four **Anupurvi** occur only in the first, second and fourth Gunasthanas, not elsewhere.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Pratyakhyanavaran** Chatushk, **Tiryanchgati**, **Udyot** and **Nichegotra** occur only up to the **Sanyata** **Sanyat** Gunasthan, not beyond.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Tiryanch** Ayuk occur only up to the fifth Gunasthan. Only at the time of death, if the final **Avalikaal** remains, there is only **Uday**, no **Udirana**.
* The **Uday** and **Udirana** of **Nidranidra**, **Prachalaprachala**, **Styanagridhi**, **Satavedaniya** and **Asatavedaniya** occur only up to the sixth Gunasthan, not beyond. Only those who have achieved complete **Indriya** **Parayapti** can stimulate **Nidranidra** etc. If such a **Jiva** undergoes **Uttara** body transformation or receives **Aharakasamudghat**, then from one **Avalikaal** before receiving them until entering the original body, there is no **Udirana** of these three. Similarly, **Deva**, **Naraki** and **Bhogabhumis** **Jivas** also do not stimulate these three.
* The **Udirana** and **Uday** of **Aharak** body and **Aharak** limbs occur only in **Pramattasanyat**, not before or after.
* The **Udirana** of **Manushy** Ayuk occurs up to the sixth Gunasthan, and its **Uday** occurs up to the fourteenth Gunasthan. Only at the time of death, if the final **Avalikaal** remains, there is no **Udirana**.
* The **Udirana** and **Uday** of **Samyaktva** nature occur from the fourth to the seventh Gunasthan for **Vedakasamyagdristi**. Only in the time of **Kritakritya** **Vedak** and in the **Utpasi** time of **Dvitiyopshama** **Samyaktva**, when one **Avalikaal** remains, there is only **Uday**, no **Udirana**.
* The **Udirana** and **Uday** of the final three **Sanhanan** occur only up to the seventh Gunasthan.
* The **Udirana** and **Uday** of **Hasya** etc. six occur only up to the eighth Gunasthan. A special characteristic is that from the time of the birth of **Devas** until the **Antarmuhurt** time, **Hasya** and **Rati** are stimulated regularly, and beyond that, it is optional.

Page #477:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

**The Explanation of the Three Meditations**

The explanation of the three meditations has been given. Now, the white meditation should be explained. It has four variations, which will be discussed. The first two variations are for the masters, and this is said for their identification:

**The first two white meditations belong to the **Shruta Kevali** (those who have perfect knowledge of the scriptures).**

The word "cha" (and) in the sutra includes the righteous meditation. According to the rule, "special knowledge is obtained through explanation," righteous meditation occurs before ascending the ladder of knowledge, and the first two white meditations occur on both ladders. This is how it should be explained.

**The remaining two white meditations belong to the **Kevali** (those who have perfect knowledge).**

The arousal and arising of the three passions (anger, greed, and delusion) and the three fires (anger, greed, and delusion) occur only until the penultimate part of the ninth stage of knowledge. They do not occur beyond that. This is a special feature: whoever ascends the ladder of knowledge due to the arising of a particular passion, does not experience its arousal in the first stage when one **avali kala** (a very short period of time) remains.

The arousal and arising of the passion of greed occur until the tenth stage of knowledge. It does not experience arousal, but arises when only one **avali kala** remains in the last stage of the tenth stage of knowledge.

The arousal and arising of the **vajranaracha** (a type of hell) and **naracha** (a type of hell) occur until the eleventh stage of knowledge.

Sleep and **prachalaki** (a type of hell) both arise and experience arousal until one **avali kala** remains in the twelfth stage of knowledge. Beyond that, they only arise until the penultimate part of the twelfth stage of knowledge.

The five knowledge-obscurations, four vision-obscurations, and five hindrances, these fourteen karmas, arise until the last stage of the twelfth stage of knowledge, and experience arousal until one **avali kala** remains in the twelfth stage of knowledge.

The human state, the five-sense beings, the **oudarika** (a type of body), the **taijas** (a type of body), and the **karman** (a type of body), the six substances, the **oudarika** limbs, the **vajravrishabhanaracha** (a type of hell), the four categories (color, etc.), the **aguru** (heavy), the **laghu** (light), the **upghat** (a type of hell), the **ucchavas** (a type of hell), the two **vihayoga** (a type of hell), the **bas** (a type of hell), the **badar** (a type of hell), the **paryapt** (a type of hell), each body, the stable, the unstable, the auspicious, the inauspicious, the beautiful, the melodious, the discordant, the **adeya** (a type of hell), the **yashkirti** (a type of hell), the **nirman** (a type of hell), and the **uchchagotra** (a type of hell), these thirty-eight karmas experience arousal and arise until the thirteenth stage of knowledge. They do not occur beyond that.

The **tirthankara** (a liberated being) karma experiences arousal and arises only in the thirteenth stage of knowledge.

Thus, constantly thinking about the **ajna** (command) and other things is righteous meditation. This is the meaning of the above statement.

Page #478:
---------------------------
358]
In the attainment of all auspiciousness,
[91406 894
8894. There are two types of *śukladhyāna* for the *kevali* with *sayoga* and *ayoga*, respectively, at the end.
8 895. To explain these types in detail, the following *sūtra* is uttered:
*Pṛthaktva-vitarka*, *ekatva-vitarka*, *sūkṣma-kriyā-pratipāti*, and *vyupara-kriyā-nivṛtti* are the four types of *śukladhyāna*. ||39||
8896. *Pṛthaktva-vitarka*, *ekatva-vitarka*, *sūkṣma-kriyā-pratipāti*, and *vyupara-kriyā-nivṛtti* are the four types of *śukladhyāna*. The meaning of each should be understood in relation to the characteristics that will be explained later.
8 897. To determine the specific object of these, the following *sūtra* is uttered:
They are of three *yoga*, one *yoga*, *kāya-yoga*, and *ayoga*, respectively. ||40||
8 898. The word "yoga" has been explained in the *sūtra* " *kāya-vāṅ-manaḥ-karma yoga*". The relationship between the four types of *śukladhyāna* and the four terms, *triyoga* etc., should be understood in order. *Pṛthaktva-vitarka* is for the three *yoga*. *Ekatva-vitarka* is for the one *yoga* among the three *yoga*. *Sūkṣma-kriyā-pratipāti* is for *kāya-yoga*. And *vyupara-kriyā-nivṛtti* is for *ayoga*.
8 899. To explain the specific understanding of the first two, the following *sūtra* is uttered:
The first two *dhyāna* are with one *āśraya*, *savitarka*, and *savicāra*. ||41||
8 900. Those two *dhyāna* which have one *āśraya* are called those with one *āśraya*. These two *dhyāna* are begun by one who has attained complete *śruta-jñāna*. This is stated in 1. *kṣaṇam-upeya sarve* (Mu.) || 2. *manvārtham-ava* (Mu.) || 3. *ubhaye 'pi* (Ā. Di. 1, Di. 2, Nā.) ||

Page #479:
---------------------------
-9144 5906] Ninth Chapter
[359 This is the meaning.  Vitaraka and Vicara are Vitaraka-Vicara, and those who dwell with Vitaraka-Vicara are Savitaraka-Vicara.  The previous [sutra] means separate and unified Vitaraka.  8901.  There, in the context of the sequence, this is said for the sake of the cessation of the undesirable:
The second is A-Vicara.  ||42|| 8902.  The second of the previous two [dhyanas] should be understood as A-Vicara.  This is said:  The first is Savitaraka and Savicara.  The second is Savitaraka and A-Vicara.  8903.  Now, what is the difference between Vitaraka and Vicara?  This is said:
Vitaraka is the heard.  ||43|| 8904.  Specifically, reasoning and inference is Vitaraka, meaning heard knowledge.  8905.  Now, what is Vicara?
Vicara is the transition of the meaning, expression, and yoga.  ||44|| 8906.  Meaning is the object, which is the substance or the synonym.  Expression is the word.  Yoga is the characteristic of the action of the body, speech, and mind.  Transition is change.  Leaving the substance, one attains the synonym, and leaving the synonym, one attains the substance - this is the transition of meaning.  Taking hold of one heard word, one takes hold of another word, and leaving that, one takes hold of another - this is the transition of expression.  Leaving the body yoga, one takes hold of another yoga, and leaving that yoga, one takes hold of the body yoga - this is the transition of yoga.  Thus, this change is called Vicara.  This is the fourfold dhyana, which is specified by the general and the specific, and is white, and is the statement of the many kinds of upaya, such as the previously mentioned secret, etc., and its meaning.  Those who dwell with Vitaraka and Vicara are called Savitaraka-Vicara dhyana.  The previous [sutra] means separate and unified Vitaraka.
8901.  In the context of the sequence in the previous [sutra], for the sake of the cessation of the undesirable meaning, the next [sutra] is said:
The second dhyana is A-Vicara.  ||42||
6902.  The second dhyana of the previous two dhyanas should be understood as A-Vicara.  The meaning is that the first white dhyana is Savitaraka and Savicara, and the second white dhyana is Savitaraka and A-Vicara.
6903.  Now, to show the difference between Vitaraka and Vicara, the next [sutra] is said:
The meaning of Vitaraka is the heard.  ||43|| 8904.  Specifically, reasoning and inference is Vitaraka, meaning heard knowledge.  8905.  Now, what is Vicara?  This is said by the next [sutra]:  The transition of meaning, expression, and yoga is Vicara.  ||44||
8906.  Meaning is the object.  From this, substance and synonym are taken.  The meaning of expression is word, and the action of the body, speech, and mind is called yoga.  The meaning of transition is change.  Leaving the substance, one attains the synonym, and leaving the synonym, one attains the substance - this is the transition of meaning.  Taking hold of one heard word, one takes hold of another word, and leaving that, one takes hold of another - this is the transition of expression.  Leaving the body yoga, one takes hold of another yoga, and leaving that yoga, one takes hold of the body yoga - this is the transition of yoga.  Thus, this change is called Vicara.  This is the fourfold dhyana, which is specified by the general and the specific, and is white, and is the statement of the many kinds of upaya, such as the previously mentioned secret, etc., and its meaning.

Page #480:
---------------------------
[360] Sarvarthasiddhau
191445906   A Muni who has performed all the necessary actions is worthy of meditation for the cessation of worldly existence. There, meditating on the dravya-paramāṇu or the bhāva-paramāṇu is not the point. The vitarka-sāmaya is the transition of the mind in the form of meaning and expression, body and speech, separately.  The mind, being insufficient, like a child with excessive enthusiasm, unstable and unrefined, even with a weapon, cuts through the nature of delusion slowly, pacifying and destroying it. This is the vitarka-vīcara-dhyāna.  The same Muni, desiring to burn the root of delusion, relying on the special purity of infinite virtues, prevents the bondage of many natures that are supportive of the knowledge-obscuring karma, reduces and destroys the state of karma, and is endowed with the use of śruta-jñāna, free from the transition of meaning, expression, and yoga, with a steady mind, with diminished kṣaya, like a vaidūrya gem, free from impurities, meditates and does not return. This is called the ekattva-vitarka-dhyāna.  Thus, the ekattva-vitarka śukla-dhyāna, like a fire that has burned the four ghatiya karma as fuel, whose rays of pure knowledge are illuminated, shining like the sun that has emerged from the obstruction of the cloud, such a Bhagavān, Tīrthankara, Kevali, or ordinary Kevali, is worthy of being approached and worshipped by the Indras, and dwells in the world for a period of time slightly less than a previous koti. When he has only an antarmukha-muhurta of life remaining, and the state of vedaniya, nāma, and gotra karma is equal to the remaining āyu-karma, then he abandons all types of vāc-yoga, mano-yoga, and bāhu-kāya-yoga, and embracing the sūṣma-kāya-yoga, accepts the sūṣma-kriyā-pratipāti-dhyāna. But when those sāyogī, who have only an antarmukha-muhurta of life remaining, and the state of the remaining three karmas is greater than that, then those who have attained the atiśaya of ātmopāyoga, who have the support of samāyika, who are endowed with special causes, who are performing the mahā-samvara, who are digesting the laghu-karma, who are free from transition, are called vīcara. This type of transformation is called vīcara.  This fourfold dharmya-dhyāna and śukla-dhyāna, described in general and specific terms, when combined with many methods such as gupti, etc., is worthy of meditation for the destruction of the world by a Muni who has performed all the necessary actions properly. Just as a child with insufficient enthusiasm, unstable and with a blunt weapon, pierces the chest over a long period of time, so too, one who has attained the power of the mind, meditating on the dravya-paramāṇu and the bhāva-paramāṇu, pacifies and destroys the nature of the delusion-inducing karma, through the mind that transitions separately in meaning and expression, body and speech. This is the vitarka-vīcara-dhyāna. Again, one who desires to burn the root of delusion-inducing karma, who has attained the special purity of infinite virtues, who prevents the bondage of many natures that are supportive of the knowledge-obscuring karma, who reduces and destroys the state of karma, who is endowed with the use of śruta-jñāna, who is free from the transition of meaning, expression, and yoga, with a steady mind, with diminished kṣaya, like a vaidūrya gem, free from impurities, meditates and does not return. This is called the ekattva-vitarka-dhyāna. Thus, the ekattva-vitarka śukla-dhyāna, like a fire that has burned the four ghatiya karma as fuel, whose rays of pure knowledge are illuminated, shining like the sun that has emerged from the obstruction of the cloud, such a Bhagavān, Tīrthankara, Kevali, or ordinary Kevali, is worthy of being approached and worshipped by the Indras, and dwells in the world for a period of time slightly less than a previous koti. When he has only an antarmukha-muhurta of life remaining, and the state of vedaniya, nāma, and gotra karma is equal to the remaining āyu-karma, then he abandons all types of vāc-yoga, mano-yoga, and bāhu-kāya-yoga, and embracing the sūṣma-kāya-yoga, accepts the sūṣma-kriyā-pratipāti-dhyāna. But when those sāyogī, who have only an antarmukha-muhurta of life remaining, and the state of the remaining three karmas is greater than that, then those who have attained the atiśaya of ātmopāyoga, who have the support of samāyika, who are endowed with special causes, who are performing the mahā-samvara, who are digesting the laghu-karma, who are free from transition, are called vīcara. This type of transformation is called vīcara.

Page #481:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

**1361**  By the power of their inherent ability to destroy the particles of remaining karma, they purify the four types of karma - danda, kapaṭa, pratar, and lokapūraṇa - by spreading out their soul-regions for four periods of time. Then, by contracting their soul-regions for the same four periods of time, they equalize the remaining four types of karma. Having attained the size of their previous body, they engage in subtle actions through the subtle body yoga and practice the subtle action contemplation. After that, they begin the fourth contemplation, the contemplation of cessation of actions. This is called the contemplation of cessation of actions because it involves the cessation of the actions of the in-breath and out-breath, and the cessation of all actions of the body, speech, and mind, as well as the cessation of the pulsation of the soul-regions. In this contemplation of cessation of actions, the complete cessation of the influx of all karmic bonds and the destruction of all remaining karma occurs. This gives rise to the complete, perfect, and well-known conduct, knowledge, and insight of the non-liberated omniscient, which is the direct cause of liberation, leading to the severance of all the entanglements of the cycle of birth and death. Then, the non-liberated omniscient, the Lord, attains liberation, having burned away all impurities, stains, and karmic bonds by the fire of the intensity of his contemplation, and having destroyed the impurities of the metals, stones, and jewels, and attained a pure, golden soul. This is a two-fold austerity, as it is the cause of restraint due to its being the cause of the cessation of the influx of new karma, and it is also the cause of liberation due to its being the cause of the destruction of the residue of past karma.

**8907** Here it is said: "Are all right-believers equally liberated, or is there some difference?" To answer this, the next aphorism says:

_Right-believers, hearers, restrained, those who have severed the infinite attachments, those who have destroyed the doubts of insight, those who have calmed the passions, those who have attained peace of mind, those who have destroyed the doubts, those who have weakened the doubts, and those who have conquered the doubts - these are liberated in countless degrees._ **45**

**8908** These ten, right-believers, etc., are liberated in countless degrees. For example, the future omniscient, the one who has five senses, the one who has attained perfection, the one who has obtained the aforementioned time-limit, etc., the one who is growing by the purification of his transformations, the one who is gradually performing the actions of the past, etc., and the one who is experiencing the ripening of karma in a small amount - these are all liberated in countless degrees.

Page #482:
---------------------------
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[9145 § 908]

A **panchendriya** (five-sensed) **paryapta** (sufficient) **jiva** (living being) who is ascending the **sopana** (stages) of **karma** (action) from **apuurvakarana** (initial action) onwards, becomes **bahutarakarma nirjara** (one who destroys many karmas). The same **jiva**, upon attaining the **nimitta** (cause) for **prathama samyaktv** (first right faith), becomes **samyagdristi** (right-seeing) and **asankhyeya guna nirjara** (one who destroys countless karmas). The same **jiva**, upon attaining the **parinama** (result) of **kshayopasama** (cessation of destruction) of **apratyakhyanavaran karma** (one of the types of **charitra mohaniya karma** (karma that hinders conduct)), becomes **shravaka** (hearer) due to the **prakarhsa** (excellence) of **vishuddhi** (purity) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara**. The same **jiva**, upon attaining the **parinama** (result) of **kshayopasama** (cessation of destruction) of **apratyakhyanavaran karma** (one of the types of **charitra mohaniya karma** (karma that hinders conduct)), becomes **virat** (one who has renounced) due to the **vishuddhi** (purity) of **parinama** (result) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara**. The same **jiva**, when he **viyojana** (separates) himself from **anantanubandhi** (infinitely connected) **krodha** (anger), **mana** (pride), **maya** (deceit), and **lobha** (greed), becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** due to the **prakarhsa** (excellence) of **vishuddhi** (purity) of **parinama** (result). The same **jiva**, when he **nirdiksha** (destroys) the **trina** (grass) of **darshan mohaniya** (karma that hinders knowledge) of **trirupa** (three forms), becomes **darshan moha kshapaka** (one who destroys the karma that hinders knowledge) due to the **atishya** (excess) of **vishuddhi** (purity) of **parinama** (result) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** as mentioned before. Thus, he becomes **kshayika samyagdristi** (one who has destroyed the karma that hinders right faith) and, while striving towards **shreshya arohana** (ascending the highest stage) and **charitra moha upasama** (cessation of karma that hinders conduct), he experiences **upasamaka** (one who destroys) due to the **prakarhsa** (excellence) of **vishuddhi** (purity) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** as mentioned before. The same **jiva**, upon attaining the **nimitta** (cause) for **charitra moha upasama** (cessation of karma that hinders conduct), becomes **upashanta kshaya** (one who has destroyed the karma that hinders conduct) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** as mentioned before. The same **jiva**, while striving towards **charitra moha kshapana** (destruction of karma that hinders conduct) and increasing **vishuddhi** (purity) of **parinama** (result), experiences **kshapaka** (one who destroys) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** as mentioned before. The same **jiva**, while striving towards **parinama** (result) of **kshayana** (destruction) of **charitra moha kshapana** (destruction of karma that hinders conduct), becomes **kshina kshaya** (one who has destroyed the karma that hinders conduct) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** as mentioned before. The same **jiva**, upon destroying the **ghatikarma** (destructive karma) by the fire of **dvitiya shukla dhyana** (second white meditation), becomes **jina** (conqueror) and becomes **asankhyeya guna nirjara** as mentioned before.

Page #483:
---------------------------
-9146 8 910] Chapter Nine
[363 5909. It is said, even in the presence of right faith, if due to the exhaustion of the qualities, they are not equal to each other, then are the Shravakas, Viratas, etc., not liberated due to the difference in qualities? It is said, this is not so. Why? Because, even though there is a difference due to the difference in qualities, due to the operation of the Nayas like Negation, etc., all of them are
Pulaka, Bakusha, Kushil, Nirgrantha and Snataka, these are the five Nirgranthas. ||46|| 8910. Those whose minds are devoid of the contemplation of the higher qualities, who do not attain perfection even in the vows, are called Pulakas, because they are like the impure Pulaka (withered grain). Those who are Nirgranthas, who observe the vows without interruption, who are engaged in enhancing the beauty of their body and instruments, who are surrounded by family and are filled with various kinds of delusion, are called Bakushas. Here, the word Bakusha is a synonym for the word 'Shabala' (multicolored). Kushilas are of two types - Pratiseshana Kushil and Kshaya Kushil. Those who are surrounded by possessions, who are perfect in both the primary and higher qualities, but sometimes contradict the higher qualities, are called Pratiseshana Kushilas. Those who have conquered the rise of other passions and who are only subject to the burning passion, are called Kshaya Kushilas. Just as in water, a wooden 1.- भावनोपेत  मु.। 2. शुद्धा: पुलाक- मु.। 3. - वारा मोहछेदशवल- आ., दि. 1 । वारान मोहसवम-दि. 21 4. -विरोधिन: मु.।

Page #484:
---------------------------
## 364] Sarvarthasiddhi

[9147891 - Prakshinaghati... Kelino dvividhaḥ snātakāḥ. Ta ete pañcāpi nimranyāḥ. Cāritrapariṇāmasya prakarshaprakarshabhede satyapi naigamasangrahādinayāpekṣayā sarve'pi te nimranthā ity ucyante.
8911. Teṣāṁ pulākādīnāṁ bhūyo'pi viśeṣapratipattyartham āha
**Samyamaśrutapratisevānātilirngaleśyopāpādastānāvikalpataḥ sādhȳāḥ. ||47||**
6 912. Ta ete pulākādayah samyamādibhiraṣṭabhiraṇuyogaḥ sādhȳā vyākhyeyāḥ. Tadyathāpulākabakuśapratisevānākuśīlā dvayoḥ samyamayoḥ samāyikacchedopasthāpanayoḥ vartante. Kaṣāyakusīlā dvayoḥ samyamayoḥ parihāraviśuddhisūkṣmasāṁparāyayoḥ pūrvayoś ca. Nirgranthasnātakā ekasminneva payākhyātasamyame santi.
$913. Śrutam-pulākabakuśapratisevānākuśīlā utkarṣeṇābhinnakṣaradaśapūrvadharāḥ. Kaṣāyakusīlā nimranyāś caturdaśapūrvadharāḥ. Jaghanyena pulākasya śrutam ācāravastū. Bakuśakuśīlanirgranthānāṁ śrutam aṣṭau pravacanamātarah. Snātakā apagataśrutāḥ kevalinaḥ.
... $914. Pratisevānā-pañcānāṁ mūlaguṇānāṁ rātribhojanavarjanasya ca parābhiyogād balādanyatamam pratisevāmānaḥ pulāko bhavati. Bakuśo dvividhaḥ upakaraṇabakuśaḥ śarīrabakuśaś ceti. Tatra upakaraṇabakuśo bahuviśeṣayuktopakaraṇākāṁkṣī. Śarīrasamskārasevī śarīrabakuśaḥ. Pratisevānārekha aprakata rahati hai usi prakār jinake karmōṁkā uday aprakata ho aur jo antarmūhartake bād prakat honevālē kevalajnāna aur kevaladarśanakō prapt karte hain de nigrantha kahalāte hain. Jinhonē cār ghātiyā karmōṁkā nāś kar diyā hai aise donōṁ prakārke kevalī snātak kahalāte hain. Ye pañcōṁ hī nirgrantha hote hain. Inmēṁ cāritrarūpa pariṇāmōṁkī nyūnādhiktakē kāran bhed honepar bhī naigama aur sangraha ādi nayōṁkī āpekṣā ve sab nirgrantha kahalāte hain.
8911. Ab un pulāk ādikē sambandhmē punarapi jñāna prāpta karānēkē liye āgēkā sūtra kahate hain
**Samyama, śruta, pratisevānā, tīrtha, linga, leśyā, upāpāda aura sthānke bhedase in nirgandhōṁkā vyākhyān karana cāhiye. ||47||**
89 2. Ye pulāk ādi samyamādi aṣṭa aṇuyogōṁkē dvārā sādhȳā hain arthāt vyākhyān karane yogya hain. Yathā pulāk, bakuś aura pratisevānākuśīl samāyik aura chhedopasthāpanā in dō samyamōṁmēṁ rahte hain. Kaṣāyakusīl pūrvōkta dō samyamōṁkē sāth parihāraviśuddhi aura sūkṣmasāṁparāy in dō samyamōṁmēṁ rahte hain. Nirgrantha aura snātak ek mātra yathākhyāta samyamēṁ rahte hain.
913. Śruta pulāk, bakuś aura pratisevānākuśīl utkriṣṭarūpase abhinnakṣaradaśa pūrvadhar hote hain. Kaṣāyakusīl aura nirgrantha caturdaśa pūrvadhar hote hain. Jaghanyarūpase pulāka kā śruta ācāra vastūpramaṇ hota hai. Bakuś, kuśōl aura nirgranthōṁkā śruta aṣṭau pravacanamātrīkāpramaṇ hota hai. Snātak śrutajnānāsē rahit kevalī hote hain.
8914. Pratisevānā-dūsarōṁkē dabāvavaś jabardastīse pañc mūlaguṇ aura rātribhojan varjan vratmēṁsē kisī ekakō pratisevānā karanevālā pulāko hota hai. Bakuś dō prakārke hote hain, upakaraṇabakuśa aura śarīrabakuśa. Unmēṁsē aneka prakārki viśeṣatāōṁkō liye hue upakaraṇōṁkō cāhanēvālā upakaraṇabakuśa hota hai tatha śarīra kā samskār karanevālā śarīrabakuśa hota hai. Pratisevānā kuśīl mūlaguṇōṁkō virādhanā na kartā huā uttaraguṇōṁkī kisī prakār kō virādhanā

Page #485:
---------------------------
## Chapter Nine

Kushila, while not contradicting the fundamental virtues, contradicts some of the secondary virtues. There is no contradiction for those who have shed the bonds of passions, Kushila, Nirgrantha, and Snataka.

8915. All Nirgranthas are Tirthas in the Tirthas of all Tirthankaras.

8916. Linga is of two types: Dravyalinga and Bhavalinga. All five Nirgranthas are Lingins with respect to Bhavalinga. They are differentiated with respect to Dravyalinga, which refers to their physical characteristics like height, color, and hair.

8917. Leshya: Pulaka has three Leshyas ahead of it. Bakush and Pratiseshana-Kushila have six Leshyas each. Kashayakushila has four Leshyas at the end. Sukshmasampray, Kashayakushila, Nirgrantha, and Snataka have only the white Leshya. A yogi has no Leshya.

8918. Upapad: Pulaka's highest Upapad is in the Sahasrar Kalpa, among the Devas who reside in the highest state. Bakush and Pratiseshana-Kushila's highest Upapad is in the Aran and Achyut Kalpas, among the Devas who reside in the state of twenty-two Sagaropama. Kashayakushila and Nirgrantha's highest Upapad is in the Sarvarthasiddhi, among the Devas who reside in the state of thirty-three Sagaropama. The lowest Upapad for all of them is in the Saudharma Kalpa, among the Devas who reside in the state of two Sagaropama. And the Snataka attains liberation.

8919. Sthan: There are countless Sanyamasthans caused by passions. The lowest Labdhisthans are for Pulaka and Kashayakushila. They both go through countless Sthans together. After that, Pulaka's Vyuchchitti happens. Then, Kashayakushila goes through countless Sthans alone. After that, Kashayakushila, Pratiseshana-Kushila, and Bakush go through countless Sthans together. Here, Bakush's Vyuchchitti happens. After that, they go through countless Sthans together. 

1. षडपि । कृष्णलेश्यादित्रितयं तयोः कथमिति चेदुच्यते—तयोरुपक रणासक्तिसंभवादार्तध्यानं कदाचित्संभवति, आर्तध्यानेन च कृष्णादिलेश्यात्रितयं संभवतीति । कषाय - मु.

1. षडपि । How do they have three Leshyas, including the black Leshya? It is said that because of their involvement in the battle of the senses, they may sometimes experience Artadhyana. And through Artadhyana, the three Leshyas, including the black Leshya, are possible. Kashay - Mu.

Page #486:
---------------------------
[366] **Sarvarthasiddhi**
[91478919] After traversing countless **sthānas**, the **pratisevna kuśīla** is extinguished. Then, after traversing countless more **sthānas**, the **kaṣāya kuśīla** is extinguished. From there onwards, the **nirgrantha** attains the **akaṣāya sthānas**. He too is extinguished after traversing countless **sthānas**. From there onwards, after traversing a single **sthāna**, the **snātaka** attains **nirvāṇa**. The **samyama-labdhi** of these is infinite.

Thus ends the ninth chapter of the **Tattvārthavṛtti** named **Sarvarthasiddhi**.
1. **prāpnoti teṣām** (mu.)

Page #487:
---------------------------
## Chapter Ten: The End

$920.$ It is said that the time has come to explain the nature of liberation, which was mentioned at the end. This is true. Liberation is attained only after the attainment of perfect knowledge. Therefore, the causes of the arising of perfect knowledge are stated in the following sutra:

**From the destruction of delusion, and the destruction of knowledge-obscuring, sight-obscuring, and karmic obstructions, perfect knowledge arises.** ||1||

$8921.$ It is appropriate to condense this sutra. Why? Because it makes the sutra shorter. How? By not using the word "destruction" separately, and by not using the word "and" due to the absence of a different case ending, the sutra becomes shorter, as in "From the destruction of delusion, knowledge-obscuring, sight-obscuring, and karmic obstructions, perfect knowledge arises." This is true, but the order of destruction is indicated by using different sentences. First, by destroying delusion and attaining the designation of "diminished karmas" for a very short time, then by simultaneously destroying knowledge-obscuring, sight-obscuring, and karmic obstructions, one attains perfect knowledge. The destruction of these karmas is the cause of the arising of perfect knowledge. Therefore, the case ending indicating the "cause" is used. 

**Question:** How is the destruction of delusion attained first? 

**Answer:** A future perfect being, who is growing in purity of results, having attained the state of un-controlled perfect vision, attains the destruction of the seven types of delusion in one of the four states of controlled-uncontrolled, deluded-controlled, and non-deluded-controlled. Having become a "karmic" perfect being, he becomes inclined to ascend the ladder of "karmic destroyers" and attains the state of non-deluded-controlled. By the application of the "unprecedented action," he experiences the designation of the "unprecedented action-karmic destroyer" state. There, he experiences the diminishing of the state and parts of the karmic nature of sins due to the purity of new results, and the increase of the parts of the experience of virtuous actions. By attaining the "non-reversal action," he attains the state of "non-reversal-karmic destroyer."

Page #488:
---------------------------
3681 Sarvarthasiddhi
[912 8 922 - By ascending the Saṃpārāya Kṣapaka Guṇasthāna, destroying the eight Kṣayās there, eliminating the Napumsaka Veda and the Strī Veda in succession, destroying the six No-Kṣayās by transferring them to the Puruṣa Veda, and then destroying the Puruṣa Veda by transferring it to Krodha Saṃjvalana, Krodha Saṃjvalana to Māna Saṃjvalana, Māna Saṃjvalana to Māyā Saṃjvalana, and Māyā Saṃjvalana to Lobha Saṃjvalana in succession through the Bādarakṛṣṭi Vibhāga, and then by making Lobha Saṃjvalana thin, experiencing the subtle Saṃpārāya Kṣapakatva, destroying all that is Mohaniya, destroying the Kṣayās completely, ascending to the Kṣīṇa Kṣayā Guṇasthāna, shedding the burden of the Mohaniya, and destroying Nidrā and Pracala in the penultimate stage of the Kṣīṇa Kṣayā Guṇasthāna, and finally destroying the five Jñāna Avaraṇas, the four Darśana Avaraṇas, and the five Antarāyas, one attains the Kevala Paryāya, which is the special state of the nature of Jñāna and Darśana, which is Avitarya Vibhūti.]
8922. It is said, "From what cause is liberation attained, and what is its characteristic?" This is explained in the following sūtra:
"Liberation is the complete destruction of all karmas due to the absence of the causes of bondage and their destruction." ||2||
8923. The absence of the causes, such as Mithyādarśana, leads to the absence of new karmas, and the destruction of the unconquered karmas occurs due to the presence of the cause of destruction mentioned earlier. The phrase "Bandha Hetvabhāva Nirjarābhyām" indicates the division based on the cause. Therefore, one should understand that liberation is the simultaneous and complete destruction of all karmas, which are the remaining karmas that have been equated with the cause of existence. There are two types of absence of karma: attainable by effort and unattainable by effort. Of these, the absence of Naraka Ayu, Tiryanca Ayu, and Deva Ayu in the case of the final body is not attainable by effort, because their existence is not available in the final body. What is attainable by effort is mentioned further. In the four Guṇasthānas, starting from Asamya Samyagdṛṣṭi, in one of the Guṇasthānas,

Page #489:
---------------------------
-1012 $ 923] Chapter Ten
[369 The seven karmic substances are destroyed. The destruction of the sixteen karmic substances, namely, Nidra-Nidra, Prachala-Prachala, Styanagaddhi, Narakagati, Tiryanchagati, Ekendriya-jati, Dvoendriya-jati, Triendriya-jati, Chaturindriya-jati, Narakagati-prayogyanupurvi, Tiryanchagati-prayogyanupurvi, Atap, Udyot, Sthavar, Sukshma, and Sadharan, takes place simultaneously in the state of Nivrittibhadarasampray. Then, in the same state, the eight kashayas are destroyed. Then, in the same state, the Napumsakaved and Strived are destroyed in succession. Then, the six Nokashayas are destroyed with a single blow. Then, the Purushaved, Sanjvalanakrodha, Sanjvalanmana, and Sanjvalanamaya are destroyed in succession in the same state. Then, the Lobhasanjvalan is destroyed at the end of the state of Sukshmasaparay. Nidra and Prachala are destroyed at the end of the state of Kshinakashay Vitragachhadmastha. The five Jnanavarana, four Darshanavarana, and five Antaraya karmas are destroyed at the end of the same state. One Vedaniya, Devagati, Audarikasharira, Vaikriyikasharira, Aharakasharira, Tejasasharira, Karmanasharira, five Bandhan, five Sanghata, six Sansthan, Audarikasharira Angopaang, Vaikriyikasharira Angopaang, Aharakasharira Angopaang, six Sanhanan, five Prashasta Varna, five Aprashasta Varna, two Gandha, five Prashasta Rasa, five Aprashasta Rasa, eight Sparsha, Devagati-prayogyanupurvi, Agurulaghu, Upghata, Parghata, Ucchvas, Prashasta Vihayogati, Aprashasta Vihayogati, Aparyapta, Pratyekasharira Sthira, Asthira, Shubha, Ashubha, Durbhaga, Susvara, Duhsvara, Anadeya, Ayashakirti, Nirman, and Nichagotra, totaling seventy-two karmic substances, are destroyed at the end of the state of Ayogakevali. One Vedaniya, Manushyayu, Manushygati, Panchendriya-jati, Manushygati-prayogyanupurvi, Tras, Bhadar, Paryapta, Subhaga, Adeya, Yashakirti, Tirthankara, and Ucchagotra, totaling thirteen karmic substances, are destroyed at the end of the state of Ayogakevali.
Note: There are a total of one hundred and forty-eight karmic substances. Of these, the karmic substances of Narakayu, Tiryanchayu, and Devayu do not exist in the state of Charmashiriri. The karmic substances of Aharakchatushk and Tirthankara are: 1. -Vedashcha tatraiva Mu. 2. Nokashayashtakam cha saha- Mu.

Page #490:
---------------------------
## 370] Sarvarthasiddhi

[1013 6 924$ 924. It is said, "Does liberation occur only from the elimination of the pudgalik dravyakarma prakritis, or also from the elimination of the bhavakarma?" This is explained in the following sutra:
And from the absence of the bhavas like auspiciousness, etc., and bhavya-tva. ||3|| $ 925. What happens? "Liberation" is understood. The inclusion of bhavya-tva is for the purpose of negating other parinaamik bhavas. Thus, it is accepted that liberation occurs from the absence of bhavya-tva and auspiciousness, etc., among the parinaamik bhavas.
8926. It is said, "If liberation is promised from the cessation of bhavas, then, similar to the cessation of auspiciousness, etc., bhavas, the cessation of all kshayik bhavas would be attained by the liberated being." This would be the case if no distinction were mentioned. But there is a distinction here, and to establish this exception, the following sutra is said:
Except for kevala-samyak-tva, kevala-jnana, kevala-darshan, and siddha-tva. ||3|| 8927. The word "anyatra" (except) is used in the fifth case. This rule applies to other bhavas except for kevala-samyak-tva, kevala-jnana, kevala-darshan, and siddha-tva. If only these four bhavas remain for the anka-siddhas, then the cessation of ananta-virya, etc., would be attained? There is no fault, because some have it and some don't. Except for these, the existence of the remaining prakritis is by rule. This jiva, through the guna-sthana-krama, eliminates the causes of bondage, and therefore, there is a gradual elimination of new bondage. And, due to the special kind of transformation of the ancient prakritis that are present in existence, there is a gradual decrease in the karmas that are present in existence. Thus, due to the complete separation of all karmas from bondage, this jiva becomes liberated. Here, the word "moksha" (liberation) is used in the sense of the separation of karma, nokarma, and bhavakarma. A samsari jiva is bound, and therefore, he is dependent on something. When his bondage is broken, he becomes liberated, i.e., he attains his own independence. Thus, the nature of liberation is explained.
8924. It is said, "Does liberation occur only from the elimination of these pudgalik dravyakarma prakritis, or also from the elimination of the bhavakarma?" To explain this, the following sutra is said:
And from the absence of the bhavas like auspiciousness, etc., and bhavya-tva, liberation occurs. ||3||
8925. What happens? Liberation occurs. Here, the word "moksha" (liberation) is understood. The inclusion of bhavya-tva in the sutra is for the purpose of negating other parinaamik bhavas. Thus, it is accepted that liberation occurs from the absence of bhavya-tva and auspiciousness, etc., among the parinaamik bhavas.
8926. It is said, "If liberation is promised from the cessation of bhavas, then, similar to the cessation of auspiciousness, etc., bhavas, the cessation of all kshayik bhavas would be attained by the liberated being." This would be the case if no distinction were mentioned. But there is a distinction here, and to establish this exception, the following sutra is said:
Except for kevala-samyak-tva, kevala-jnana, kevala-darshan, and siddha-tva.
8927. Here, the word "anyatra" (except) is used in the fifth case. This rule applies to other bhavas except for kevala-samyak-tva, kevala-jnana, kevala-darshan, and siddha-tva. If only these four bhavas remain for the anka-siddhas, then the cessation of ananta-virya, etc., would be attained? 1.  Yate natvopa  mu.।  Yateta dopa  na.। 2. 'Kapadane' -Jainendra. 1, 4,411 'Apadane karake ka vibhakti bhavati.' Vritti:।  Pratiṣ 'ko nirdeśaḥ' iti pāṭhaḥ.

Page #491:
---------------------------
~1016 8 931] Chapter Ten
1371. There is no difference between infinite power, etc., because they are inseparable from knowledge and perception.  A being without infinite power cannot have infinite knowledge, and happiness is knowledge-like.  
Objection:  Since liberated beings are formless, they do not exist.
Solution:  They have a form in their past and future bodies.
8928. Objection:  If the soul is shaped by the body, then when the body is absent, the soul will naturally expand to the size of the space of the world, and thus it will become infinite.
Solution:  This is not a fault.  Why?  Because there is no cause.  The connection with name-karma is the cause of contraction and expansion.  Since there is no connection with name-karma, there is no contraction or expansion.
8929. Objection:  If there is no contraction or expansion due to the absence of a cause, then just as there is no movement downwards or sideways due to the absence of a cause of movement, there will also be no upward movement.  Therefore, the liberated soul will remain in the same place where it is liberated.
Solution:  This is addressed in the following sutra:
The liberated soul goes upwards to the end of the world. ||5||
8930. After that.  Whose?  Of the one who has been liberated from all karma.  The word "aṅ" in the sutra is used in the sense of "command".  The liberated soul goes upwards to the end of the world.
8931. Objection:  How can we be certain of this upward movement, since no cause has been given?
Solution:  This is addressed in the following sutra:
The liberated soul goes upwards due to past experience, the absence of attachment, the breaking of bondage, and the nature of such movement. ||6|| 1.  Because it is synonymous with knowledge, Mu., Ta.  2.  Past and future bodies, Mu.  3.  The connection with karma, Ta.

Page #492:
---------------------------
[372]
Sarvarthasiddhi
[1017 § 932
8932. It is said that even a *pushkala* (abundant) is not capable of achieving the intended meaning without the support of an example, therefore the next *sutra* says:
Like a potter's wheel that has been spun, like a gourd freed from its coating, like a castor seed, and like a flame of fire. || 7 ||
8933. There is a sequential connection between the *hetu* (reasons) mentioned in the previous *sutra* and the examples mentioned in this *sutra*. For example, the rotation of the potter's wheel is caused by the combined effort of the hand, the rod, and the wheel. Even after it stops, it continues to rotate due to the residual effect of the previous action. Similarly, the liberated soul, even in the absence of the many vows it has taken to attain liberation, continues to move upwards due to the influence of those vows. Moreover, this is due to its non-attachment. Just as a gourd, burdened by the weight of the clay coating, sinks in water, but when the clay coating loosens due to the water, it quickly rises to the surface, similarly, the soul, burdened by the weight of karma, moves erratically in the world due to its attachment to it, but when it is freed from that attachment, it rises upwards. Moreover, this is due to the breaking of the bonds. Just as the castor seed rises upwards when the bond of the seed pod is broken, similarly, the liberated soul, freed from the bonds of all karma, including the names of birth and caste, rises upwards. Moreover, this is due to the nature of its upward movement. Just as a flame of fire, naturally inclined to move upwards, rises upwards due to its connection with the wind, similarly, the liberated soul, free from the karma that causes the various forms of movement, rises upwards due to its inherent nature of upward movement.
8934. It is said that if the liberated soul is naturally inclined to move upwards, why does it not rise above the *loka* (world)? The next *sutra* answers this question.

Page #493:
---------------------------
## Chapter Ten

[373 The absence of Dharma-astikaya] ||8|| 6 935. Dharma-astikaya, the cause of the attainment of motion, is not present in the liberated soul, therefore there is no movement beyond the Lokanta. In the absence of that, the absence of the division of Lok and Alok is implied.

8936. It is said that these liberated souls, due to the absence of the causes of motion, birth, etc., are devoid of any distinction. However, there is some distinction, because
the liberated souls can be classified based on:
* Kshetra (region)
* Kala (time)
* Gati (motion)
* Linga (gender)
* Tirtha (pilgrimage)
* Charitra (conduct)
* Pratyekabuddha (self-enlightened)
* Bodhitabuddha (enlightened by another)
* Jnana (knowledge)
* Avagahana (understanding)
* Antara (difference)
* Sankhya (number)
* Alp-bahutva (fewness-manyness) ||9||

8937. The liberated souls are classified based on these thirteen Anuyoga (principles), which are considered as Sadhya (achievable) and Vikalpya (optional). This classification is based on the two Nayas (perspectives) of Anugraha (grace) for the present and the past. For example, with respect to Kshetra (region), in which region do they attain liberation? According to the perspective of the present, liberation is attained in the Siddhi-Kshetra (region of liberation), in one's own region, or in the region of space. According to the perspective of the past, with respect to birth, liberation is attained in the fifteen Karma-bhumis (regions of action), and with respect to the end of the cycle of births and deaths, liberation is attained in the Manushya-Kshetra (human region). With respect to Kala (time), in which time is liberation attained? According to the perspective of the present, one attains liberation while being in the state of liberation. According to the perspective of the past, with respect to birth, one attains liberation when born in the Utsarpini (ascending) or Avasarpini (descending) time cycle. Specifically, in the Avasarpini time cycle, one attains liberation when born in the last part of the Sushma (prosperity) or the Dushama (adversity) period, or when born in the Dushama-Sushma (adversity-prosperity) period. One does not attain liberation when born in the Dushama (adversity) period. And one does not attain liberation in any other time period. With respect to the end of the cycle of births and deaths, one attains liberation in all the time periods of the Utsarpini and Avasarpini. With respect to Gati (motion), in which motion is liberation attained? Liberation is attained in the Siddhi-Gati (motion of liberation) or the Manushya-Gati (human motion). With respect to Linga (gender), in which gender... 1.  These thirteen... Ta., Na. 2. With respect to birth, fifteen Karma... Mu.

Page #494:
---------------------------
[374]
**How is omniscience attained?**

**By what means is omniscience attained?**

Omniscience is attained through the three Vedas, but not in a material sense, rather in a spiritual sense. In a material sense, it is attained through the masculine gender. Alternatively, it is attained through the non-scriptural gender. In the context of past lives, it is attained through the scriptural gender.

**By what means is omniscience attained through a Tirthankara?**

There are two types of omniscience attained through a Tirthankara: omniscience attained through a Tirthankara and omniscience attained through others. There are two types of others: those who attain omniscience in the presence of a Tirthankara and those who attain omniscience in the absence of a Tirthankara.

**By what means is omniscience attained through conduct?**

Omniscience is attained through conduct that is nameless or through conduct that is of one, four, or five types.

**By what means is omniscience attained through knowledge?**

Omniscience is attained through one, two, three, or four types of knowledge.

**What is the meaning of "avagahana"?**

"Avagahana" refers to the state of being pervasively present in one's own space. There are two types of "avagahana": inferior and superior. Superior "avagahana" is five hundred and twenty-five dhanus, while inferior "avagahana" is slightly less than three and a half aratnis. There are many variations in between. Omniscience is attained through any one type of "avagahana".

**What is the difference between those who have attained omniscience?**

The difference between those who have attained omniscience is that the inferior difference is two times, while the superior difference is eight times. The inferior difference is one time, while the superior difference is six months.

**What is the number of those who attain omniscience?**

The number of those who attain omniscience is one in one time for the inferior and one hundred and eight in one time for the superior.

**What is the meaning of "alp bahutva"?**

"Alp bahutva" refers to the difference in the number of those who have attained omniscience in relation to the different types of realms, etc. For example, in the context of the present time, there is no difference in the number of those who attain omniscience in the realm of omniscience. However, in the context of past lives, there are two types of those who attain omniscience in the realm: those who are born with omniscience and those who attain omniscience through liberation. Of these, those who attain omniscience through liberation are the fewest. Those who are born with omniscience are many times more numerous.

**What are the different types of realms?**

The different types of realms are: the realm of karma, the realm of non-karma, the ocean, the island, the upper realm, the lower realm, and the realm of the animals. Of these, those who attain omniscience in the upper realm are the fewest. Those who attain omniscience in the lower realm are many times more numerous. Those who attain omniscience in the realm of the animals are many times more numerous. Those who attain omniscience in the ocean are the fewest. Those who attain omniscience in the island are many times more numerous.

**What is the meaning of "sarvatah stoka"?**

"Sarvatah stoka" refers to those who attain omniscience in the realm of salt water. Those who attain omniscience in the realm of time are many times more numerous.

Page #495:
---------------------------
## Chapter 10

[375]

**Qualities.** The Siddhas of Jambudvipa are of countable qualities. The Siddhas of Dhaataki-khand are of countable qualities. The Siddhas of Pushkaradvipa are of countable qualities. Thus, in the division of time and other things, the lesser and greater should be known according to the Agama. ||10||

8938.  With a mind desiring the happiness of heaven and liberation, the Aryas have named this Tattvarthavrittika, Sarvarth Siddhi. It is the essence of the nectar of the Jinenadra's teachings, therefore, it should be constantly held in mind with devotion. ||1|| Those who, knowing the essence of the truth, listen to and read this Tattvarthavrittika with devotion to Dharma, have, as it were, taken the nectar of supreme happiness in their hands. Then, what is there to be said about the happiness of the Chakravartis and the Devas? ||2|| I bow with devotion to those Veer Bhagawan, who have illuminated this undisputed truth of all the Tattvas with their pure, perfect knowledge, and whose feet are worshipped by humans and Devas. ||3||

Thus ends the tenth chapter of the Tattvarthavrittika named Sarvarth Siddhi. May all be well.

Page #496:
---------------------------
Appendix 1
Sutra Text
Chapter 1
1. Right faith, knowledge, and conduct are the path to liberation.
12. Faith in the principles is right faith.
3. It is acquired through their nature or through learning.
4. The principles are: soul, non-soul, inflow, bondage, restraint, destruction, and liberation.
5. Their definition is based on their substance, nature, and application.
6. They are acquired through the means of knowledge.
7. They are established through the principles of indication, ownership, means, field, and state.
8. They are many due to their existence in different numbers, fields, contacts, times, and differences.
9. Knowledge is of six types: faith, scripture, perception, intuition, and omniscience.
10. They are the means of knowledge.
11. The first four are indirect.
12. Perception is direct.
13. Faith, memory, understanding, thinking, and comprehension are synonyms.
14. They are caused by the senses and sense-objects.
15. Perception, apprehension, and retention are the functions of the senses.
16. They are many, varied, quick, spontaneous, spoken, certain, and others.
17. Of the object.
18. Apprehension of the meaning.
19. Not by the eye or other senses.
20. Scripture is of twelve types, preceded by faith.
21. The perception of existence is the intuition of the hell-beings and the gods.
22. The perception of destruction and cessation is the intuition of the remaining beings.
23. The intuition of the mind is straight and vast.
24. Its specific nature is due to purity and impurity.
25. The intuition of the mind is specific to the pure field, the owner, and the objects.
26. Faith and scripture are dependent on the principles, but not on all the principles.

Paragraph Number
4
9
13
17
21
23
25
32

163
165
173
175
181
184
189
191
197
199
201
205
212
214
216
1. Inflow - Haribha. 12. Intuition of the mind - T. Bha. 3. There - Haribha. 4. Apprehension and destruction - T. Bha., Haribha Si. In Tattvarthavartika, both 'avaay' and 'apaay' are found. 5. - Dependent - T. Bha. Quick, spontaneous - S., Dependent, certain - Si. Vr. Pa. 6. In T. Bha., there are two sutras in place of the sutra 'भवप्रत्ययो इत्यादि': 'द्विविधोऽवधिः ॥21॥ भवप्रत्ययो नारकदेवानाम् ॥22॥'. 7. As stated - T. Bha. 8. Intuition of the mind - T. Bha. 9. Intuition of the mind - T. Bha. 10. All principles - T. Bha.
219
221
223

Page #497:
---------------------------
Appendix 1
[377
225 227 229 231
27. In the forms of the avadhis. 28. In the infinite part of the manas-paryaya. 29. In all the dravya-paryayas, only the kevala. 30. One and so on are the bhajyani, simultaneously in one, not four. 31. The mati-shruta-avadhis, and the viparyaya. 32. Like a madman, due to the non-difference of sat and asat, obtained by chance. 33. The nayas, which are similar to the Nigama-sangraha-vyavahara-arju-sutra-shabda.
Thus ends the first chapter.
233
235 240
251
260
Second chapter 1. The aaupashamika-kshayika-bhavas, the misra, and the jiva's own nature, the audayika-parinaamika. 2. Two, nine, eighteen, one, twenty, three, the distinctions, in order.
254 3. Samyaktva-charitra.
256 4. Jnana-darshan-dana-labha-bhoga-upabhoga-viryani. 5. Jnana-ajnana-darshan-labdhayas, four, three, three, five distinctions, samyaktva-charitra-samyama-asamyama.
262 6. Gati-kashaya-linga-mithyadarshan-ajnana-asamyat-siddha-leshyas, four, four, one, one, one, six distinctions. 7. Jiva-bhavy-abhavya-tvani.
267 8. Upayoga is the lakshana.
270 9. Sad is of two kinds, eight, four distinctions.
772 10. Samsarini and muktas.
274 11. Samanaska-amanaska.
281 12. Samsarini, trasas, sthavaras.
283 13. Prithvi-ap-tejo-vayu-vanaspati, sthavaras.
285 14. Dvi-indriyadi, trasas.
287 15. Pancha-indriyani.
289 16. Two kinds.
291 17. Dravya-indriya, for the purpose of nirvritti.
293 18. Bhava-indriya, for the purpose of labhya-upayoga.
295 19. Sparshan-rasan-ghrana-chakshu-shrotrani.12
297 20. Sparsha-rasa-gandha-varna-shabda, their artha.13
299 21. Shruta, of the anindriya.
301 1. Manas-paryaya, its bha. 2. -Shruti-vibhangas, vip-haribha. 3. Sutra-shanda, nayas, its bha. 4. In its bha, the word adha is of two, three distinctions. 5. -Danadi-labdhayas, its bha. 6. In its bha, the word 'yathakramam' is more. 7. Siddhatva, its bha. 8. Bhavyatvadi, its bha. 9. The word 'sa' is not there, si.. pa. 10. 'Prithvi-ambu-vanaspati, sthavaras', its bha. 11. Tejo-vayu, dvi-indriyadi, trasas, its bha. 12. 'Sparshan-rasan', etc., before the sutra, 'Upayoga, sparsh-adi', its bha. 13. Sandas, tesham artha, its bha.

Page #498:
---------------------------
[307
309
327
328
378]
**Sarvartha Siddhi 22.** One for plants.
**303 23.**  One for each increase for worms, ants, bees, humans, etc.
**305 24.**  Those with consciousness are of the same mind. **25.** Karma yoga is in the body. **26.**  Movement in a series.
**311 27.**  For a being without a body.
**313 28.**  For a being with a body, before the four.
**315 29.**  One-time body.
**317 30.**  One, two, or three are the food-takers.
**319 31.**  Birth is unconsciousness, womb, and birth.
**321 32.**  Those with consciousness, cold, and covered, others are mixed, one is the womb.
**323 33.**  Womb, egg, and pot-born have a womb.
**325 34.**  Birth for gods and hell beings. **35.**  Unconsciousness for the rest. **36.**  Bodies of the generous, the active, the food-takers, the luminous, and the karmic.
**330 37.**  Very, very subtle.
**332 38.**  Countless qualities in space, before the luminous.
**334 39.**  Infinite qualities in the beyond. **40.**  Without obstruction. **41.**  And without beginning connection.
**340 42.**  Of everything.
**342 43.**  Those and the beginning are divisible, simultaneously in one, four.
**344 44.**  The last without enjoyment.
**346 45.**  Beginning with womb, unconsciousness, and birth.
**348 46.**  Birth-like, active, and karmic.
**350 47.**  Gain and understanding.
**352 48.**  Even the luminous.
**354 49.**  Good, pure, and non-obstructive, the food-taker, only of the controlled mind. **50.**  The hell-born, eunuchs.
**358 51.**  Not gods. **52.**  The rest are the three Vedas.
**362 53.**  The last body, the best body, countless, long-lived, and without wind.
**364**  This is the second chapter. **1.**  One for the wind-born. **2.**  One-time body. **3.**  Two or three are the food-takers. **4.**  Womb-birth. **5.**  Womb, egg, and pot-born. **6.**  Birth for hell beings and gods. **7.**  Active food-taker. **8.**  Without obstruction. **9.**  Simultaneously in one. **10.**  Birth-like, active, and karmic. **11.**  This sutra is not in T.B. **12.**  Only of the fourteen previous holders. **13.**  This sutra is not in T.B. **14.**  "Last body" is also a variant reading. **15.**  Birth-like, last body, best person, countless.
**336**
**338**
**356**
**360**

Page #499:
---------------------------
Appendix 1
Chapter Three
1. Ratnaśaṁ rābalukāpaṁkadhūmatamomahātamaḥ prabhā bhūmayo ghanāmbuvataākāśapratiṣṭhāḥ saṁptādhordhaḥ.
2. Tāsu triśatpañcaviṁśatipañcadaśadaśatripāṁco na kanarakaśatasahasrāṇi pañca caiva yathākramam. 3. Nārakā nityāśubhataraleśyāpariṇāma dehavedanāvikriyāḥ.
4. Parasparodīritaduḥkhāḥ.
5. Saṁkliṣṭāsurodīritaduḥkhāśca prāk caturthyāḥ.
6. Teṣvek triṣaptadaśasaptadaśadvaṁśatitrayastrit sāgaropamā sattvānāṁ parā sthitiḥ.
7. Jambūdvīpalavaṇodādayo śubhanāmāno dvīpasamudrāḥ.
8. Dvidvividviṣkambhāḥ pūrvapūrvaparikṣepiṇo valayākṛtayaḥ.
13. Maṇivicitrapārkhā upari mūle ca tulyavistārāḥ.
14. Padmamahapādmatigiṁśakeśarimahāpuṇḍarīkapuṇḍarīkā hradāsteṣāmupari.
15. Prathamo yojanasahasrāyāmastadarḍhaviṣkambho hṛdaḥ.
374
376
378
380
9. Tanmadhye merunābhirvṛtto yojanasatasahasraviṣkambho jambūdvīpaḥ.
382
10. Bharatahaiṁavataharivideha ramyaka hairanyavatairāvatavarṣāḥ kṣetrāṇi.
384
11. Tadvibhājinaḥ pūrvāparāyatā himavanmahāhimavanniṣadhanīlarukmiśikhariṇo 'varṣadharaparvatāḥ. 386 12. Hemārjunatapaniya vaiḍūryarajatahemamayāḥ. 7
388
390
392
394
396
398
400
16. Daśayojanāvagāhaḥ.
17. Tanmadhye yojanam puṣkaram.
18 Tadviguṇadvigunā hradāḥ puṣkarāṇi ca.
19. Tannivāsinyo devyaḥ śrīhrīdhṛtikīrtibuddhilaksmyah palyopamastthitayaḥ sasāmānikapariṣatkaḥ.
20. Gaṁgā sindhu rohidrorohitāsyāhariddharikāntāsītāsitodānā rīnarakāntā suvarṇarūpyakūlārakta raktodāḥ saritastanmadhyagāḥ.
21. Dvayordvayoḥ pūrvāḥ pūrvagāḥ.
22. Śeṣāstvaparagāḥ.
23. Caturdaśanadīsahasraparivṛtā gaṁgāsindhvādayo nadyaḥ.
24. Bharataḥ ṣaḍviṁśatipañcayojanasatavistāraḥ ṣaṭ cai'konaṁviṁśatibhāgā yojanasya. 25. Tadviguṇadvigunavistārā varṣadharavarṣā videhāntāḥ.
29. Uttarā dakṣiṇatulyāḥ.
27. Bharatarāvatayorvṛddhihāsau ṣaṭsamayābhyāmutṣarpiṇyavasarpiṇyavarpiṇībhyām.
28. Tābhyāmparā bhūmayo'vasthitāḥ.
26. Ekadvitripalyopamastthitayo haiṁavatakahārivarṣakadaivakuravakāḥ. 30. Tathottarāḥ.
31. Videheṣu saṁkhyeyakālāḥ.
32. Bharatasya viṣkambho jambūdvīpasya navatisatabhāgaḥ. 33. Dvirdhātakīkhaṇḍe.
[379

366
368

370
372
402
404
405
407
409
411
413
415
417
419
1. T. Bhā. meṁ pṛthutarāḥ pāṭha adhik hai. 2. T. Bhā. meṁ tāsu nārakāḥ itanā hī sūtra hai. Narakōṁkī saṁkhyāeṁ tattvārthabhāṣya meṁ dī haiṁ. 3. T. Bhā. meṁ nārakāḥ yah pāṭha nahīṁ hai. 4.  Lavaṇādayah T. Bhā. . 5. T. Bhā. meṁ 'tatra' itanā pāṭha adhik hai. 6. Vaṁśadharaparvatāḥ Si. . 7. Yahāṁse lekar āge 'dvirdhātakīkhaṇḍe' is sūtra ke pūrvatakake 21 sūtra tasvārthabhāṣyamānya sūtrapāṭha meṁ nahīṁ haiṁ.
421
423
425
427
429

Page #500:
---------------------------
[380]
433
**Sarvartha Siddhi 34. Pushkaras.** 35. **Praangmanushottara** humans. 36. **Aryas** and **Mlechchas**. 37. **Bharata, Ravata, Videha** are the karmbhoomis, other than **Deva, Kuru, Uttara Kuru**. 38. **Nristhiti** in the **paravara** for **tripalya** duration. 39. And **tiryagyonis**.
This is the third chapter.
434
436 438 440
450
462
Fourth chapter 1. **Devas** of the **Chaturnaikaaya**.
442 2. **Adita** in the three **pitaantaleshyas**.
444 3. **Dashastapanchadvadashavikalpas** up to **kalpopapanna** paryanta.
446 4. **Indrasamanika, trasta, trish, parishad, atmaraksha, lokpala, anika, prakirnaka, abhiyogyakiviksha** and **eka** each.
448 5. **Trayastrisha** **lokpalas** and **vyantara jyotishkas**. 6. **Indras** of the previous two.
452 7. **Kayapravicharas** from **Aishana**.
454 8. The rest are **sparsharoopa, shabda, manahpravicharas**.
456 9. **Pare** are **apravicharas**. 10. **Bhavana** residents are **asura, naga, vidyut, suparna, agni, vata, tanita, udhadhi, dvipa, dik, kumara**.
460 11. **Vyantaras** are **kinnara, kimpurusha, mahoraga, gandharva, yaksha, rakshasa, bhuta, pishacha**. 12. **Jyotishkas** are **surya, chandra, graha, nakshatra, prakirnaka, tara**.
464 13. **Meru** clockwise, **nityagati** in the **nriloka**.
466 14. **Kalavibhaga** created by it.
468 15. **Bahiravashitas**.
470 16. **Vaimanikas**.
472 17. **Kalpopapanna** and **kalpaatitas**.
474 18. **Upariyapari**.
476 19. **Soudharma, Shana, Sanatkumara, Mahendra, Brahma, Brahmottara, Lantava, Kapishta, Shukra, Shatara, Sahasra, Aanat, Pranataya, Aranachuta, Navasu, Veyakeshu, Vijayavaijayanta, Jayanta, Aparajita** and **Sarvartha Siddhi**.
478 20. **Sthiti, Prabhava, Sukha, Dyuti, Leshya, Vishuddhi, Indriya, Avadhi, Vishayata** are more.
480 21. **Gati, Sharira, Parigraha, Abhimantata** are less.
482 1. **Mlechchas** also. T. Bha., Haribha. 2. **Parapare**. T. Bha. 3. **Tiryagyoninaam cha**. T. Bha. 4. **Chaturnaikaaya**. T. Bha. 5. T. Bha. has "**Triteeya** **Pitaantaleshya**" as a sutra. 6. **Parishad, Atma**. T. Bha. 7. T. Bha. has "**Sitaantaleshya**" as a sutra after this sutra. 8. T. Bha. has "**Dvayordvayo**" as an additional text. 9. **Gandharva**. T. Bha. 10. **Surya, Chandra**. T. Bha. 11. **Prakirnatarka**. T. Bha. 12. **Bahmnalokalantkamahasukrasahanarishvanat**. T. Bha. 13. **Sarvarthasiddhe cha**. T. Bha.

Page #501:
---------------------------
Appendix.
:381
-484 486 488 490 492 494 496
498
500 502 504
22. With yellow-lotus-white-dust particles, two-two, four-four, remaining. 23. From the previous, to the Veiyaka, the Kalpa. 24. The Laukantika, with the Brahma-loka as their abode. 25. Those who are based on Sarasvati, Aditya, Agni, Arun, Garud, Toya, Tushita, and Vyavahara. 26. In Vijaya, etc., two are the last. 27. The remaining are the Tiryancha-yoni, from the Aupapatika-manushya. 28. The remaining of the Sthiti, Asura, Naga, Suparna, and Dvipa, are less than the Sagara-upamatra-tri-palya-upamatra. 29. In Saudharma and Ishana, they are greater than the Sagara-upamatra. 30. In Sanatkumara and Mahendra, they are seven. 31. But, they are greater by three, seven, nine, eleven, thirteen, and fifteen. 32. From Aranya and Uchchuta, upwards, one by one, in the nine Veiyaka, in Vijaya, etc., and in Sarvartha-siddhi. 33. The other is greater than the Palya-upamatra. 34. From the other, from the other, the previous, the previous, the next. 35. And, of the Naraka, in the second, etc. 36. Ten thousand years, in the first. 37. And, in the Bhavana. 38. And, of the Vyantara. 39. The other is greater than the Palya-upamatra. 40. And, of the Jyotishka. 41. The eighth part of that is the other. 42. Of the Laukantika, eight are the Sagara-upamatra, of all.
Thus ends the fourth chapter.
506
508
510
512 514 516 518 520 522
524
Fifth chapter 1. The Ajiva, Dharma, Adharma, Akasha, and Pudgala.
526 2. The Dravya.
528 3. And, the Jiva.
530 1. Yellow-mixed-lotus-mixed-white-dust particles, two-two, four-four, remaining, thus, T. Bha. 2. Laukantika, T. Bha. 3. Vyavahara, Maruta, and Arisht, T. Bha. 4. Aupapatika, T. Bha. 5. In place of this one sutra, there are four sutras in T. Bha. They are as follows: Sthiti. 29. In the Bhavana, of the Dakshina-ardha-adhipati, the Palya-upamatra, half. 30. Of the remaining, one-fourth less. 31. Of the Asura-indra, greater than the Sagara-upamatra. 32. 6. In place of this one sutra, in T. Bha., there are three sutras. They are as follows: Saudharma, etc., in order. 33. Sagara-upamatra. 34. Greater. 35. 7. In T. Bha., there is a sutra, "Seven, in Sanatkumara." 8. In T. Bha., there is a sutra, "Greater by three, seven, nine, eleven, thirteen, and fifteen." 9. Sarvartha-siddhi, T. Bha. 10. Greater, T. Bha. 11. In T. Bha., two more sutras are found before this sutra. They are as follows: Sagara-upamatra. 40. Greater. 41. 12. Greater, of the Jyotishka, T. Bha. 13. In place of this sutra, in T. Bha., the following sutras are found: Of the Prahana, one. 49. Of the Nakshatra, half. 50. Of the Taraka, one-fourth. 51. The lowest, one-eighth. 52. One-fourth, of the remaining. 54. 14. This sutra is not found in T. Bha. 15. In T. Bha., there is one sutra in place of these two sutras, "Dravya, Jiva."

Page #502:
---------------------------
##  **Translation:**

**538**
**544**
**550**
**552**
**556**
**558**
**562**
**382]**

**4.**  The eternal forms are permanent.
**5.**  The pudgalas are the forms.
**6.**  They are one substance, from the sky.
**7.**  They are inactive. **8.**  There are countless regions of dharma and adharma, and one jiva.
**9.**  The sky is infinite.
**10.**  The pudgalas are countable and uncountable. **11.**  The naan.
**12.**  The lokakasha is pervasive.
**13.**  It is whole in dharma and adharma. **14.**  The pudgalas are divisible into one region, etc. **15.**  The jivas are divisible into countless parts, etc.
**16.**  Like a lamp, by the destruction and expansion of regions. **17.**  Dharma and adharma are the causes of motion and rest. **18.**  The sky is pervasive.
**19.**  The pudgalas are the body, speech, mind, and breath. **20.**  They are also the causes of pleasure, pain, life, and death.
**21.**  The jivas are interdependent.
**22.**  The actions of time are the changes and transformations of existence and non-existence.
**23.**  The pudgalas have touch, taste, smell, and color.
**24.**  They also have sound, bondage, subtlety, coarseness, form, difference, shadow, sun, and light.
**25.**  They are atoms and aggregates.
**26.**  They arise from difference and aggregation.
**27.**  From difference comes the atom. **28.**  From difference and aggregation comes the visible.
**29.**  The characteristic of existence.
**30.**  That which is, is combined with production, destruction, and permanence.
**31.**  That which is not, is eternal.
**32.**  It is given, not given, and established. **33.**  Bondage is due to smoothness and roughness. **34.**  Not for the inferior qualities.
**35.**  For the similar, due to the similarity of qualities.
**36.**  But for the qualities that are two or more, etc.
**37.**  In bondage, there is more, and there are also the consequential.
**38.**  Substance is like a change of qualities. **1.**  In T. Bha. there is the sutra "akashadeshadravyani". **2.**  In place of this sutra, there are two sutras in T. Bha.: "Asankhyeyaah pradeshaah dharmadharmayoh ||7|| Jeevasya ||8||". **3.**  "Visargabhyam" - T. Bha. **4.**  "Sthityupagraho" - T. Bha. **5.**  "Vartana parinaamah kriyaa" - T. Bha. **6.**  "Sanghatabhedebyah" - T. Bha. **7.**  "Chaakshushaah". **8.**  This sutra is not in T. Bha. **9.**  "Bandhe samaadhiko parinaamiko" - T. Bha. **10.**  "Paryayavad dravyam" - T. Bha.
**577**
**587**
**589**
**599**

Page #503:
---------------------------
39. Time.
40. It is infinite time.
41. Qualities are without qualities, depending on substance.
42. Its state is transformation.
Appendix 1
This is the fifth chapter.
Sixth Chapter
1. The union of body, speech, and mind with karma.
2. It is inflow.
3. Auspicious is of merit, inauspicious is of demerit.
4. Of attachment and aversion, of the two kinds of karma, and of the paths of transmigration.
5. The five, four, five, and twenty-five kinds of sense-attachment, vows, and actions are the divisions of the former.
6. Intensity, mildness, known, unknown, state, locus, and power are the specialities of the speciality.
7. The locus is living beings and non-living beings.
8. The first is the beginning of effort, the beginning of effort, the beginning of union, the beginning of karma, the beginning of action, the beginning of permission, and the specialities of attachment, three, three, three, four, and one hundred.
9. The ultimate is the division of two, four, two, and three, by non-activity, non-deposition, union, and nature.
10. The obscuration of knowledge and perception, by the destruction of the enemy, by envy, by internal effort, by obstruction, by non-obstruction.
11. Sorrow, grief, anguish, lamentation, killing, lamentations, fear of self and others, and the place of the untrue.
12. The true is the union of patience, purity, compassion, giving, non-attachment, and restraint.
13. The perception of delusion is the doctrine of the omniscient, the assembly, the dharma, the gods, and the non-verbal.
14. The perception of delusion is the intense transformation from the arising of attachment.
15. The life of a hell being is characterized by many beginnings and attachments.
16. Illusion is the womb of the animal.
17. The life of a human being is characterized by few beginnings and attachments.
18. And natural gentleness.
19. And the absence of vows for all.
20. The divine is characterized by attachment, restraint, non-restraint, non-restraint, desire, non-destruction, childhood, and penance.
21. And rightness.
22. The cycle of karma is the name of the inauspicious.
23. The opposite is the auspicious.

Page #504:
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:

24. Purity of vision, discipline, and possession of virtues; absence of transgressions in the virtuous; constant utilization of knowledge and spiritual urgency - these are the powers. Renunciation, austerity, association with sadhus, practice of samadhi, reverence for the Arhat-acarya, and devotion to the scriptures are necessary for the attainment of Tirthankara-hood.

25. Censure or praise of others, and the revelation or concealment of their good or bad qualities - these belong to the lower gotra.

26. The opposite of this is the higher gotra, and there should be no pride in it.

27. Causing obstacles is antaraya.

Seventh Chapter
1. The vow of abstinence from himsa, asatya, steya, abrahma, and aparigraha.
2. The vow is of the small and the great type.
3. There are five contemplations for its steadfastness.
4. The five are: control of speech, mind, and body, proper acceptance and deposit, and carefulness in eating and drinking.
5. The five are: overcoming anger, greed, fear, laughter, and refusal.
6. The five are: avoiding occupied dwellings, causing obstruction to others, begging, disagreement with the dharma, and impurity.
7. The five are: listening to stories of women, contemplating their attractive limbs, recollecting past pleasures, indulgence in sensual pleasures, and attachment to one's own body.
8. The five are: avoiding attachment and aversion to pleasant and unpleasant sense objects.
9. Perception of himsa and the like, or suffering itself.
10. Or suffering alone.
11. Friendliness, joy, compassion, and equanimity towards those who are distressed by their lack of virtues.
12. Or the nature of the world and the body, for the sake of spiritual urgency and detachment.
13. Killing living beings due to careless activity is himsa.
14. False speech is asatya.
15. Taking what is not given is steya.
16. Sexual intercourse is abrahma.
17. Attachment to possessions is aparigraha.
18. The vrati is free from impurities.
19. He is both a householder and a homeless ascetic.
20. The householder has the small vows.
21. He is endowed with the vows of limiting directions, places, harmful activities, periodic self-restraint, fasting, limiting consumption and use, hospitality, and sharing.
22. He has cultivated sallekhana, the final vow leading to death.

Page #505:
---------------------------
Appendix 1
23. Doubt, anxiety, uncertainty, other-sight, praise, and censure are the transgressions of Right Faith. 24. There are five transgressions in each of the five vows, in order.
25. Binding, cutting, excessive burden, imposition, non-drinking, and non-eating.
32. Desire, curiosity, arrogance, examination, enjoyment, consumption, and uselessness.
33. Difficult practice of yoga, disrespect, forgetfulness, and non-presence. 8
34. Unseen, unmindful, careless, giving, censure, imposition, non-respect, forgetfulness, and non-presence.
35. Mindful connection, mixed, and over-ripe food.
36. Mindful deposit, covering, other-designation, jealousy, and exceeding time.
711
26. False teaching, association, explanation, writing, action, removal, form, and mantra differences. 27. Theft, use, taking, giving, opposing, transgression of the state, lack of proper measure, delusion, imitation, and transactions. 712 28. Performing another's marriage, hasty, accepted, not accepted, arrival, sexual play, intense desire, and attachment. 713 29. Land, building, silver, gold, wealth, grain, female slave, male slave, and exceeding the proper measure.
714
30. Upward, downward, sideways, transgression, land increase, and other memory-obstructions.
716
31. Bringing, sending, use, word, form, proportion, and wrong perception.
37. Life, death, fear, friendship, affection, happiness, and cause. 2 | 38. Giving for the sake of benefit, one's own excess, and giving.
39. Due to the specific nature of the object, giver, and recipient, there is a specific nature of giving.
Thus ends the seventh chapter.
Eighth Chapter
1. False belief, non-restraint, carelessness, and attachment are the causes of bondage.
2. Due to attachment, the soul takes up karmic particles, this is bondage.
3. Nature, state, and experience are the fourteen divisions, and their types.
4. The first is the knowledge, faith, and obscuration, knowable, and delusion, called name, lineage, and other differences.
5. Five, nine, two, eighteen, twenty-four, two, forty, and two are the divisions in order.
6. Intellect, scripture, limit, mind, and perception are the five types of knowledge. 116
7. Eye, non-eye, limit, sleep, non-sleep, sleep, unsteady, unsteady, unsteady, lethargy, and greed are the types of faith. 8. True, false, good, and bad.

[385
706
708
710

717
718
719
720
721
722
723
725
727
729
733
735
737
1. - transgressions. T.B. | 2. cutting, T.B. | 3. secret explanation. T.B. | 4. hasty, accepted. T.B. | 5. play, intense desire. T.B. | 6. memory-obstructions. T.B. | 7. excessive enjoyment. T.B. | 8. non-presence. T.B. | 9. deposit, censure, imposition, non-respect, forgetfulness, and non-presence. T.B. | 10. connected. T.B. | 11. deposit, establishment. T.B. | 12. cause-making. T.B. | 13. T.B. has "connection" as a separate sutra. | 14. -experience. T.B. | 15. -delusion, name. T.B. | 16. T.B. has only "intellect, etc." as a sutra. | 17. lethargy, greed, knowable. T.B. |
739
741
743
745

Page #506:
---------------------------
## Chapter 8

**386]**
9. The three, two, nine, and sixteen categories of *darshanacharita*, *mohaniya*, *kashaya*, *yakashay*, and *vedaniya* are: *samyaktava*, *mithyatva*, and both of these, *kashaya*, *yakashay*, *hasya*, *rati*, *arati*, *shoka*, *bhaya*, *jugupsa*, *stri*, *pum*, *napumsaka*, *veda*, *ananta*, *anubandhya*, *pratyakhyana*, *pratyakhyana*, *sanjvalana*, and *vikalpa*. Each of these is one, and there are also *krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, and *lobha*.
10. *Naraka*, *tiryag*, *yoni*, *manushya*, *deva*.
11. *Gati*, *jati*, *sharira*, *anga*, *upanga*, *nirmana*, *bandhana*, *sanghata*, *samsthana*, *samhanana*, *sparsha*, *rasa*, *gandha*, *varna*, *anuguru*, *ladhu*, *upa*, *ghata*, *paghata*, *tapa*, *udyota*, *uchchvasa*, *vihaya*, *yoga*, *taya*, *pratyekasha*, *rotra*, *rasa*, *subhaga*, *susvara*, *shubha*, *sukshma*, *paryapti*, *sthira*, *adeya*, *yasha*, *kotti*, *seta*, *rani*, *to*, *artha*, *karatva*.
12. *Uchcha* and *nicha*.
13. *Dana*, *labha*, *bhoga*, *upabhoga*, *virya*.
14. *Adita*, *tisri*, *antaraya*, and *trinshat* are equal to *sagara*, *koti*, *koti*, and *para sthiti*.
15. *Saptati* is for *mohaniya*.
16. *Vimshati* is for *nama* and *gotra*.
17. *Trayastri* is equal to *sagara* for *ayush*.
18. *Aparadvadash* is for *muhurta* for *vedaniya*.
19. *Ashtau* is for *nama* and *gotra*.
20. *Sesha* is for *antarmuhurta*.
21. *Vipaka* is *anubhava*.
22. *S* is like *nama*.
23. *Tatascha* is *nirjara*.
24. *Nama* and *pratyaya* are *yoga* in all places, and are *sukshma* and *aikakshetra* in their *avagaha* and *sthita*. They are *sarvatma* in all *pradesha*, and are *ananta* and *antapradesha*.
25. *Sadya*, *shubha*, *ayur*, *nama*, and *gotra* are *punya*.
26. *Ato* other than this is *papa*.

**End of Chapter 8**

## Chapter 9

1. *Asrava* *nirodha* is *samvara*.
2. *Samvara* is through *gupta*, *samiti*, *dharma*, *anupreksha*, *parishad*, *jaya*, and *charitra*.
3. *Tapas* is *nirjara*.
4. *Samyagyoga* is *nigraha*, and *nigraha* is *gupta*.

**747**
**752**

**754**
**756**
**758**
**760**
**762**
**764**
**766**
**768**
**769**
**771**
**773**
**775**
**776**
**779**
**781**
**783**

*Samyaktava*, *mithyatva*, and both of these
1. *Darshanacharita*, *mohaniya*, *kashaya*, *yakashay*, and *vedaniya* are the three, two, nine, and sixteen categories. *Kashaya*, *ananta*, *anubandhya*, *pratyakhyana*, *pratyakhyana*, *avaran*, *sanjvalana*, and *vikalpa* are each one. *Krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, and *lobha* are also included. ||10|| *T. Bha.*
2. *Purvya*, *guru* - *T. Bha.*
3. *Yashansi*, *seta*, *rani* - *T. Bha.*
4. *Tirthakrutva* and *cha* - *T. Bha.*
5. *Dana* etc. - *T. Bha.*
6. *Nama* and *gotra* are *vimshati* - *T. Bha.*
7. *Manyayush* is *kasy* - *T. Bha.*
8. *Antarmukhurta* - *T. Bha.*
9. *Anubhava* - *T. Bha.*
10. *Vagadha* *sthita* - *T. Bha.*
11. *Sadvedya*, *samyaktava*, *hasya*, *rati*, *purushaveda*, *shubha*, *ayur*, *nama*, and *gotra* - *T. Bha.*
12. This sutra is not in *T. Bha.*

**784**
**788**
**790**
**792**

Page #507:
---------------------------
Appendix 1
[387
838
840 842
5. Eeryabhaasheshanaadaananikshepotsergaa samitiyah.
794 6. Uttamakshamaamaardavaarjavasatyasouchasanayamatapastyaagaakinchannyabrahmacharyaanidharma.
796 7. Anityaasharanasamsaraikattvaanyatvaashuchya sravasanvaranirjaralokabodhidurlabha 'masvakhyaat
tvaanuchintanamanuprekshaah. 8. Margaachyaavananirjararth parishodhavyah parishaha. 9. Kshutpipasaashiitoonadamshamashkanagnyaratistreechaaryaanishadyaashayyakoshavadhayachanaalabharogatrunasparshmalasatkarmapuraskara prajnaajnaanaadarshanaani.
814 10. Sukshmasampraayachhadmasthaveetaraagayosschaturdasha. 11. Ekadasha jine. 12. Baadarasampraaye sarve. 13. Jnaanavaraneprajnaajnaane.
844 14. Darshanamohaantarayaayoradarshanaalabhau.
946 15. Chaaritramo naagnyaratistreenishadyakroshhayachanasatkarmapuraskaraah.
847 16. Vedaniye sheshaah.
849 17. Ekadayobhaajya yugapadaikasminnaikonavimsate.
851 18. Samaayikchhedoupasthapanaparihaaravishuddhisukshma sampraayayathaakhyatamiti chaaritram. 853 19. Anashaavamaudaryavattiparisankhyaanarasaparityaagavivaktashayyaasanakayakleshaah baahya tapa. 855 20. Praayashchittavinayavaiyaavrittyasvadhyaayavyutsargadhyaanaanyuttaram.
857 21. Navachatudashapandchdvibheda 'yathakrama praaradhyaanaat.
859 22. Aalochanapratikramanatadubhayavivekavutsargatapa chhedaparihaaroupasthapana.
861 23. Jnaanadarshanachaaritroupacharaah.
863 24. Aachaaryoupaadhyaayatapaasvishaikhaglanaganakulasangha sadhu manojnaanaam.
865 25. Vaachanaaprichchhanaanupreksha aamnayadharmopadeasha. 26. Baahyaabhyantaroupadhyoh.
869 27. Uttamasamhananasyaikaagrachintaanirudho dhyaanamaantarmuhurtaat.
871 28. AartaroudradHshuklaani. .
873 29. Pare mokshahetoo. 30. Aartagamanojnasya sampraayouge tadvipraayogaay smritisamanvaaharah. 31. Viparitam manojnasya. 32. Vedanaayaasch. 33. Nidaanam cha.
883 34. Tadaviratadeeshaviraatprammatasanayataanaam.
885 35. Hinsaanaaritasteyavishaayasamsarakshane bhyo roudram aviraatadeeshaviraatayo.
887 1. Uttamakshama. T. Bha. 2. Shuchitvaasrav. T. Bha. 3. Yugapadaikonavimsate. T. Bha. 4. -pasthapyaparihaar. T. Bha. 5. Sukshmasampraay. T. Bha. 6. Yathaakhyataani. T. Bha. 7. Dvibhedam T. Bha. 8. Sthapanani T. Bha. 9. Shaikshak- T. Bha. 10. Sadhusamanojnaanaam T. Bha. 11. In place of this sutra, T. Bha. has two sutras: Uttamasamhananasyaikaagrachintaanirudho dhyaanam. 27. Aantarmuhurtaat. 28. 12. Dharma. T. Bha. 13. -mamanojnaanaam T. Bha. 14. T. Bha. has the reading 'viparitam manojnaanaam' and this sutra is after the sutra 'vedanaayaasch'.
868
815
877
879
881

Page #508:
---------------------------
## Chapter 9

36. For understanding the establishment of the consequences of the actions of obedience, [it is said]: "Dharmya."
37. "The former knowers are white."
38. "The Kevalins are others."
39. "The arguments of separateness, subtle actions, the cessation of the practice of actions, and the cessation of actions."
40. "The three-one, the yoga-kaya, the yoga, and the a-yoga."
41. "In the beginning, with the support of one, with deliberation and reflection."
42. "The second is without reflection."
43. "Deliberation is the heard."
44. "Reflection is the meaning, the expression, the yoga, and the transition."
45. "The Samyakdrishti Shravakas, the Vira, the Ananta, the Viyojaka, the Darshan, the Mohakṣapaka, the Upaśama, the Kopaśānta, the Mohakṣapaka, the Kṣīṇa, the Moha, the Jinas, are gradually free from countless qualities."
46. "The Pulaka, the Kushakusha, the Ula, the Nigrantha, the Snātaka, the Nirgrantha."
47. "The Samyama, the Shruta, the Pratisevna, the Ati-tirtha, the Linga, the Leshya, the Upāpāda, the Sthāna, are attainable by choice."

## Chapter 10

1. "From the destruction of delusion, from the destruction of the covering of knowledge and the inner obstacles, comes Kevala."
2. "From the destruction of the causes of bondage, from the destruction of karma, comes complete liberation from karma, Moksha."
3. "And from the absence of the auspicious, etc., and the state of being."
4. "Except for Kevala, Samyaktvagyanadarshan, and Siddhatva."
5. "After that, it goes upwards, towards the light."
6. "From the previous practice, from the non-association, from the cutting of bondage, and from the transformation of the path."
7. "Like a potter's wheel that has been turned, like a water-filled pot that has been emptied, like a castor oil plant, like a new fire flame."
8. "From the absence of the Dharmastika."
9. "The Kṣetra, the Kāla, the Gati, the Linga, the Tirtha, the Charitra, the Pratyekabuddha, are attainable."

"From the knowledge of the Kabuddha, from the understanding of the knowledge, from the inner number, from the multitude."

Page #509:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
Verse from Tattvartha-vrtti by Shri Prabha Chandra

Saluting the omniscient Jina, the worthy of worship in the three worlds, I shall expound the Tattvartha-vrtti, which destroys the impenetrable darkness. (1)

'The class (varga) is the collection of powers (shakti-samudaya), as stated in the Sutras. (1.1) 
Regarding the 'path of liberation (moksha-marga)', the 'knower (jnataram)' refers to the Buddhist, the 'destroyer (bhettaram)' refers to the Naiyayika-Vaiseshika, and the 'enjoyer (bhoksharam)' refers to the Yogin. (2.3)

The definition (lakshanam) is the determination (vidhanam) based on the specific nature (prakara). The mere statement of the essence (svarupa-kathana-matram) is the purpose (uddesha-matram). (4.5)

The 'distinctly separated (viviktam)' means free from the obstruction of the mobile (trasa). (4.5)

A certain worthy one (kascid bhavyah) is named Prasiddha. (4.7)

'Delusion (moha) is the firm (nishtha) non-ascertainment.' The word 'firm' (nishtha-shabdena) denotes the conduct (charitra) of liberation. The one whose firm state (nishtha) is near (pratyasanna) is called 'near-firm' (pratyasanna-nishthah). (4.7)

'Agurna' means 'uplifted (udyatah)'. (4.8)

'Visarga' means the utterance (ucchayana) in the context of description (nirupana-karmani). (8.22)

'Upasdya' means 'having approached near (samipe gatva)'. (11.15)

'Karma' refers to the substance-karma and the state-karma (bhava-karma). (1.8)

The qualities (guna) of universals (jati), attributes (guna), actions (kriya), and substances (dravya) are the qualifiers (viseshana) where the thing (vastu) does not possess that quality (atad-gunam). (13.2)

The doctrine (vada) devoid of proof (pramana) is false (prada). They consider the Tirthankaras as themselves, due to the absence of the essential nature (niscaya-rupa-shunyatva). (1.10)

'Nikshepya' means the designated place (vivakshita-pradesha) of the dice (akshanam) and the ropes (pashananam). The word 'adi' refers to the basket (varataka) and others. (13.6)

'Liberation (moksha) is the absolute destruction of the nine innate qualities of the self, such as knowledge, happiness, sorrow, attachment, aversion, effort, merit, demerit, and impressions.' (2.1)

1. There is another reading 'mala-apratima-prabodhah'.
2. The reason for this verse is not clear. It is the 45th verse of Amita-gati's Pañcasaṃgraha.

Page #510:
---------------------------
## 390]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
13.12 It is not appropriate to say that the three characteristics of Audarika-Vaikriyika-Aharakalakshanatraya are six, because the giving of the appropriate pudgala to the seven Paryapti is not karma.
13.13 The Vedak Samyaktv, which is the beginning of the destruction of the Prakruti, is infused and matured.
13.15 When the Yukta Jiva, having become a Kritakritya Vedak with Samyagdristi, turns towards Kshayika Samyaktv for the elimination of the Aprakruti, which is not present, then if he dies for the elimination of the Mukhyajiva, then for the establishment of the Antarmuhurta of the Kritakritya Vedak, for the description of the Kalajiva, etc.,
If he dies in the first part of the four parts of the Praman, then he is born in the Devas. If he dies in the second part, then he is born in the Devas or the Manusyas. If he dies in the third part, then he is born in the Devas, Manusyas, or Tiryanchas. If he dies in the fourth part, then he is born in any of the four Gatis. Therefore, the Vedak Samyagdristi should be known as Pragrhy-Paricchidy. According to the Praman, there is no contradiction in the birth of the Tiryancha Gati and Narak Gati, because of the existence of the fourfold characteristics of Swarupa, etc., in relation to the Pararupa, etc. Similarly, the Aparyaptakas should be known as Kshayopa-samik Samyaktv, because of the non-existence of the fourfold characteristics in relation to the Pararupa, etc. The rest is due to the special proficiency. If the Parinati is destroyed, then the Kshayika of the Tiryanchas does not exist. Why? Because the characteristics of Satva, Asatva, Nitya, Anitya, etc., are based on the special Parinama, which is related to the Artha.
17.1 The human being who is born in the Karmabhumij is the one who begins the destruction of Darshan and Moh. Before the beginning of the destruction, the Tiryanchas are under the control of the Nidarsha...||7||
Even if the lifespan is bound, the Tiryancha who is born in the excellent Bhogabhumijati is born only in the Tiryancha Purushas, not in the Tiryancha Stree. It is said, "The Darshan and Moh Kshapana, which is the beginning of the Kshayika and Kshayopa-samik Samyaktv, is taken by the rule in the Manusya Gati, the one who is born in the Karmabhumij, and not the Nishthaphak. Therefore, the Paryaptak and Aparyaptak Narakas are born in the first Naraka and in all the Gatis." The word "Pattavag" in the gatha means "the beginning", and the word "Nivago" means "Samyaktv".
17.4 The Manushees are Bhava-vedi Stree, not Dravya-vedi Stree, because the Kshayika is not possible for them.
1. "The Vedak Dristi is born in the Karmabhumina Rishi, who is his own. The Kritakritya, who has the Kshayika Dristi, is bound by the lifespan in the four Gatis."

Page #511:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[391
2- Not possible.
NNN
w w w w N
No, because the Dravyavedi women's Kshayik Samyaktv, Samyam, Upsham Samyaktv and both Aharak, if one of these is present, the rest are not. 'Aharaya Doshin' from 17.5, in the state of Apariapta, how can the Upshamik Samyaktv of the Devas be possible? - Aharak and Aharak Mishra should be taken.  Because of the impossibility of death of the Kta.  It is not appropriate, because the death of those who have Upshamik Samyaktv with Mithyatv as the cause is impossible.  Those who have Upshamik Samyaktv with Vedak as the cause, by rule, ascend the Shreni, so the Shreni- 19.7, how can the Navveyakvasi, because of being Ahminndra, die with Charitramoh Upsham, in the state of Apariapta?  If so, it is said, some Samyakdrishti, even in the state of Apariapta of the Devas, Upshamik Samyaktv is possible.
He does that, hearing it, another who is there, takes Samyaktv. [Doubt- How can Upshamik Samyaktv be possible for the Devas in the state of Apariapta, because the death of the beings with Upshamik Samyaktv is impossible?  Answer- It is not a fault.
It is not right to say so.  The beings who attain Upshamik Samyaktv from the Mithyatv guna-sthan, their death is impossible, but those who have Upshamik Samyaktv with Vedak as the cause, they ascend the Shreni by rule.  Doubt- Nav Aveyakvasi Devas are Ahminndra, how can they hear Dharma Shravana?  Answer- Some Samyakdrishti, hearing it, another who is there, takes Samyaktv.  Or, there is no discussion about Praman Nay etc. in them.  There is general Tattv Vichar like the Lingi, so the beings who have attained Charitramoh Upsham, die and become Devas by rule.  There is no fault. ]
Upshamik Samyaktv is possible even in the state of Apariapta of the Devas.
8.30
20.5 The best state of Sansarik Kshayik Samyaktv is 6. 27
Trayastrishat Sagaropamani.  The characteristic of Sagaropama is 18.2, why is the Upshamik Samyaktv of Parihar Shuddhi Samyata not possible?  "Dahakoda Kodiyo Palljava, Sa Sayaru Uchai Ekkanaastiti Cheduchyate, Manahparyaya Parihar Shuddhi Upshamik- Tava."  Sant Muhurta Ashtavarsha Heen Purvakoti Dwayadhik.  Among the Samyaktv Aharakrdhi, if one is possible, the other three are not possible later.  The Sansari Vishistta of that is not possible.  Because, it is possible.  Because, in Manahparyaya, Mithyatv Purvak Upsham- should be prohibited, not Vedak Purvak.  It is said- 'Padhvas Du Parimaan Sar Khalu Sadahasakodiyo. 'Manapjjav Pariharo Ubasama Sammataharaya Donni.
Chhappanna Cha Sahasssa Nayavva Vasagananaae. 'Edasi Ekkagave 'Seshanam Sambhavo Natthi. '
Thus, the lifespan of the one who is born with Purvakoti years, after eight years, Aharaya Donni... Aharak Aharak Mishra...
After years, in the inner Muhurta, he destroys Darshan Moh, Kshayik [Why is the Upshamik Samyaktv of Parihar Shuddhi Samyata not possible?
Samyakdrishti is born.  He performs Tapascharan, makes all things perfect, not possible?  The answer is that Manahparyaya, Parihar
Shuddhi, Upshamik Samyaktv and Aharakrdhi, if one of these is present, the other three are not possible.  But
because of the impossibility of staying for a longer time.  If it happens, he becomes the beginning of Darshan Moh Kshapana,
then the other three do not cross it, it is said- 'Khavanae Pattayago Jammi Bhave Niyamdo Tado Anna.  Nakar
Nakamadi Tinni Bhave Dasanmohammi Khiinami. '
(Pra. Panchasam. 1/203) 1. Go. Ji., Ga. 728.  Pra. Panchasam. 11/94 'Natviti Asesayam Jane. ' 2. Pu. Kodisadhasasai. 'Boddhva Vasakodiinam. '-Sarva. Si. Udhrut. Jambu. Pra. 13/1.2

Page #512:
---------------------------
## 392]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[The highest state of Kshayika Samyaktvam in the worldly realm is thirty-three Shankas. When added to the human lifespan, it results in sixty-six Sagaras, and eight years less than two Purvakoti Sagaras. Does this mean that the lifespan of a human is greater than two Purvakoti Sagaras?**

**Answer:** Such a doubt should not be entertained. Because one Sagar is said to be equal to the lifespan of ten Kodakodi Palya. The lifespan of the heavens is measured in Sagaras, and the worldly characteristics are shed at the end of the last Sagar. This is explained as follows:

A being born in the realm of karma, with a lifespan of 31 Purvakoti years, after being born in the womb, attains Kshayika Samyakdrishti after eight years, and after that, the destruction of Darshanamoha takes place in the last Muhurta. Thus, he attains Sarvarthasiddhi through the practice of Tapas.

**Explanation:**

There are numerous differences in Samyakdarshan, in terms of words. According to the calculation of years, seventy lakh fifty-six thousand crore years constitute one Purva. Thus, there are countless and infinite variations of Samyakdarshan.

There are countless and infinite differences in the Samyakdarshan of those who have faith and those who are worthy of faith, because the tendencies of those who have faith are countless and infinite. There are also countless and infinite differences in those who are worthy of faith, because Samyakdarshan is the subject of faith.

**Therefore, there are countless and infinite differences in Samyakdarshan.**

**20.7** The Vedaka has sixty-six Sagaras. This is how:

In the Saudharma, Shukra, and Satara heavens, the lifespan is two, sixteen, eighteen, and thirty Sagaras respectively. Or, in the Saudharma heaven, if a being is born twice, the lifespan is four Sagaras. In the Sanatkumar, Brahma, Lantava, and Uparimauveyak heavens, the lifespan is seven, ten, fourteen, and thirty-one Sagaras respectively.

**22.3** The lifespan of a human being is greater than the lifespan of these heavens. This is not a cause for doubt. The lifespan of the last Sagar is the remaining lifespan after the human lifespan has passed. This is accepted.

**8.35** The highest state of Kshayika Samyaktvam, the Vedaka, is sixty-six Sagaras. This is how:

In the Saudharma heaven, the lifespan is two Sagaras. In the Shukra heaven, the lifespan is sixteen Sagaras. In the Satara heaven, the lifespan is eighteen Sagaras. In the Uparimauveyak heaven, the lifespan is thirty Sagaras. The total of these is sixty-six Sagaras.

Or, in the Saudharma heaven, if a being is born twice, the lifespan is four Sagaras. In the Sanatkumar heaven, the lifespan is seven Sagaras. In the Brahma heaven, the lifespan is ten Sagaras. In the Lantava heaven, the lifespan is fourteen Sagaras. In the Uparimauveyak heaven, the lifespan is thirty-one Sagaras. The total of these is also sixty-six Sagaras.

**23.1** How is it possible that a single Anivriti Gunasthan can have both Vedatva and Avedatva?

**Answer:** Anivriti Gunasthan is divided into six parts. In the first three parts, the Vedas remain, hence Vedatva. In the remaining parts, the Vedas are lost, hence Avedatva.

Page #513:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[393
6. 37
The number of 23.5 samyag-dṛṣṭi (right belief) without contradiction. Samyag-mithyā-dṛṣṭi (mixed right and wrong belief) is (29699103). It is said that pure knowledge (kevala-jñāna) is not possible. Its three types of mixed knowledge - 'The six senses, nine births, and five negligences (pramattā) occur.' Due to the threefold basis. And it is said, 'The vigilant (apramatta) and the restrained (saṃyata) are innumerable, that is, the restrained with negligence are half of them-two crore ninety-nine lakh ninety-three thousand.' In the description of its ignorance, it should be seen that the number is one hundred and three. It is also said - due to the absence of the object of knowledge as it really is in the case of the restrained with negligence.
59398206 are the restrained with negligence and the vigilant are half of them.] [In the case of samyag-mithyā-dṛṣṭi, neither pure knowledge nor pure ignorance occurs, but in each of the eight upasama-gaṇas (stages of subsidence of passions), in each of the eight moments, there are three types of mixed knowledge. It is also said - 'Know the number sixteen, twenty-four, thirty, thirty-six, forty-two, forty-eight, fifty-four, fifty-four. The mixed stages are eight, four, two, and one.' The omniscient author, while speaking of knowledge, has not mentioned its number, considering the highest number, but in the description of its ignorance, one should see its number, because the samyag-mithyā-dṛṣṭi does not know the object as it really is.]
'Know the sixteen, twenty-four, thirty, thirty-six, forty-two, forty-eight, fifty-four, fifty-four.
The restrained and the unrestrained, the four upasama-gaṇas (stages of subsidence of passions).' 8.45
The number, with respect to the entry of one, two, or three, and the highest of four or five, is to be understood by the commentators as limited to a part of a palyopama (an immeasurably large number) with reference to the entry into the eighth moment. The previous is according to the words. It is stated in its own time. The numbers that have arisen in their own time are not much different from each other in terms of quantity. There, in one or the other stage, they are of the measure of two hundred.
The second is much more than the first. The third is much more than the second, as stated. The restrained and the unrestrained are everywhere few. The restrained with negligence are ninety-nine thousand two hundred and eight.
Koti-pṛthaktva (multiplicity of millions) number: Koti-pañcaka-tri-navati-lakṣa-aṣṭa (five million, ninety-three lakh, eight).
They are of the measure of ninety-two thousand two hundred.
The four upasama-gaṇas (stages of subsidence of passions) are one each in the stages.
Out of the eight moments, in one moment each, they are 16, [The numbers mentioned further are - in the case of sāsādana-samyag-dṛṣṭi (right belief attained through spiritual effort), they are 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 54. Taking eight moments up to the restrained and the unrestrained, the number of each is the infinitesimal part of the palyopama of the four stages. This number contains only the numbers 16, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, 54. The similarity is in the words, not in the meaning, because there is an increase or decrease in the specific numbers in the initial moments. The sixteen highest numbers up to the sāsādana-samyag-dṛṣṭi should be known, but the number of those with mixed stages is more. It is said - 'The number of upasama-gaṇas is sixteen, and the number of those with mixed right belief is much more. Twenty-four, thirty, thirty-six, forty-two, forty-eight, fifty-four, the restrained and the unrestrained are the least. Know the number of the restrained with negligence and fifty-four.'] 
The fifty-four that the Sarva-ārthasiddhi-kāra (the omniscient author) has mentioned is the highest number of the apramatta-saṃyatas (the vigilant restrained). Half of that is a koti (ten million).
The entry into the eighth moment is mentioned. In its own time.

Page #514:
---------------------------
## Sarvarthasiddhi
[394]

The number of beings gathered in the **Sarvarthasiddhi** is countable, meaning there are 25.2 **Chaturnakshapka** and **Ayogakevali** in each of the eight **Gunasthanas**. It is also said, "The time sequence should be seen as before. Only the **Tegamupashamaka** are 299 in the **Gunasthanas**."

The number should be doubled. It is said, "In each **Gunasthanas** of the **Vishesharth-Upashama** series, there are 32, 48, 60, 72, 84, 96, 108, 108. In time, the **Charitramohaniya** is pacified by the **Chhannaudi** 78, 178, and **Bodhabhava**. From the lowest, one being enters, and from the highest, 54 beings enter. This statement is general. In comparison to the specific, there are eight more years. Here also, one or two, etc., are mentioned separately from the eight-time entry. In time, there are eight consecutive **Upashama** series suitable for the **Yogya**. Each of them has 89 **Uttarasamaya**. In the first **Samaya**, one being enters from the beginning of the five **Gunasthanas** and ascends to 16 beings in the highest form. In the tenth **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 24 beings in the highest form. In the third **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 30 beings in the highest form. In the fourth **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 36 beings in the highest form. In the fifth **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 42 beings in the highest form. In the sixth **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 48 beings in the highest form. In the seventh **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 54 beings in the highest form. In the eighth **Samaya**, one being ascends from the beginning to 54 beings in the highest form. The total of all these is 304, but many **Acharyas** say 299 by subtracting five. In the **Dhavala**, **Vira Sena Swami** has mentioned the number 299 as the proof of entry in the eighth **Samaya**. He has called himself the **Acharya** tradition. See **Pu. 3, p. 92**.

The quantity of each **Kshapka** gathered in time is 598. The quantity of all four **Kshapkas** and the fifth **Ayogakevali** in the eighth **Samaya** is 3000. It is also said, "The quantity of **Kshina Kshaya** is 3000, meaning 2990. What then? There are five **Hima**." The quantity of **Apshamaka** is 199. The quantity of **Sayogakevali** is double, meaning 398.

[Doubt - In eight **Samayas**, the sum of 16, 32, etc., numbers is 304? Solution - It is not right to say that the **Kshapkas** mentioned are different in meaning. Even if the **Upashamaka** are not continuous in eight **Samayas**, they are not complete in comparison to the number gathered in their own time, but they are five less. The **Sayogakevali** are less in their own time. Therefore, the sum of the **Upashamaka** from the eighth to the eleventh **Samaya** is 1199. The quantity of the **Chatur Gunasthanavarti** **Upashamaka** is 898502.

It is said,

Page #515:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[395
'Eight hundred thousand and eighty-nine thousand. Thus it is said - measured by the fraction of Pratara. Series by series, the number of Khamoshijana is five hundred and two. ' Multiplied by Pratara, it becomes Pratara. Measured by the fraction of that number,
-[Go. Ji. 628] the number of series, as many regions as there are, so many Narakas are there [The number of Sayogakevalis is also twice the number of Upshamkas, therefore, in eight times, the first time, the first earth, the number of Mithyadristi Narakas is innumerable, the series are in order, one or two, etc., up to thirty-two. Doubt - What is this series? Answer - One should know the difference between the number and the excellent number. - Like a garland of seven long pearls
The rows of regions of the sky are called series. This doubt - Then it is useless to say that the number of Sayogakevalis is different from the number of Kshapakas mentioned (because the Kshapakas are
twice the number of Upshamkas?)
Multiplying the series by Pratara, Pratara is obtained. Measured by the fraction of that Pratara, the number of innumerable series, as many regions as there are, so many Mithyadristi Narakas are there in the first Naraka. The number of Sayogakevalis in their own time is equal to the number of Kshapakas,
The quantity of Sayogakevalis in their own time is one lakh, that is, eight lakh eighty
25.11 For a subtle human being, the number of Mithyadristi humans is nine thousand five hundred and two. It is also said - 'The number of Sayogakevalis is measured by the fraction of the number of series. The number of Sayogakevalis, starting from Sasadan and ending with Sanjata, is eight lakh eighty-nine thousand
five hundred and two.']
000. Mixed 1040000000. Unsanjata: All these are together, starting from Pramatta and ending with A-yogakevali, the number of excellent regions is 7000000000. Regions 130000000. And if they happen to be together at one time, then three less - It is said - The number is nine crore (89999997). Thirteen crore regions, in the Sasana, in the Mani, or in the
Misra, then twice that number, seven crore and fifty. ' 'Twenty-seven, eighty, six in the middle, all those who are Sanjata.
[From the human path, from Sasadan Gunasthan to Sanjata, I bow down to Anjali Mauli, Hatho, Tiyaran, Suddho, Namansami. ' The number of humans from Sanjata to Sanjata is countable. It is also said
(Go. Ji. 632) In the fifth region, in the Gunasthan, there are thirteen crore humans [From Pramatta Sanjata to A-yogakevali, all these are there, in the Sasadan Gunasthan, there are fifty-two crore, and in the Sanjata Gunasthan, there are twice as many, that is, one hundred and four crore humans. If they are all together at one time, their number is three less than nine crore. It is also said. The number of all Sanjatas is eight crore crore. ' Ninety-nine lakh ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine. I bow down to them with folded hands, and with pure mind, speech, and body.
26.7 The number of Paryaapta-Pthivyadika-Kayikas is innumerable.
Now, what is this name, Loka? Pratara multiplied by series becomes Loka,
a special measure. 25.7 Innumerable series. Now, what is this series? [If the quantity of Paryaapta-Pthivyadika-Kayika etc. beings is mentioned, it is innumerable Lokas. Multiplying Pratara by series, Loka is obtained,
a special measure. This is a difference in quantity.]
2. Go Ji., Ga. 633. 3. Dhavala Pu. 3,
1. Dhavala Pu. 3, 10 96. Go. Ji. Ga. 6291 p. 254. Go. Ji. Ga. 641.

Page #516:
---------------------------
## 396]
**Saathasaddhi**
8.60
It is not correct to say that the five senses are not found in the middle and heavenly realms, because the five senses are found in hell, the 29.12 realms, and in the state of Dandakavat of the Sayogakevali, in comparison to the middle and heavenly realms. The realm of the Uttaraloka is an immeasurable part of the realm, in comparison to the Pratara. 
The five senses are found only in specific places within the Nali, just as the three Vatalayas are found only in their respective regions, due to the pervasiveness of the realm. The entire realm is the realm of the Sayogakevali, in comparison to the filling of the realm. Therefore, their realm is also an immeasurable part of the realm. (The realm of the Sayogakevali is an immeasurable part of the realm in comparison to the Dand and Kapata forms of the opening. The realm is an immeasurable part of the realm in comparison to the Pratara form of the opening. 
8.75
33.1 The size of the realm is an immeasurable number of Yojanakoti Akash Pradesh, because their extent is only up to the three Vatalayas. The realm is three hundred and forty-three times the size of a square with a side equal to the length of the Lakshana Rajju. The realm is filled with the movement of the soul in its own place, the movement in another place, and the birth of the soul at the end of its life, without any interval between the places. The filling of the realm is done by the souls, in comparison to the opening. In comparison to the movement in its own place, the realm of the Saasadan Sayogakevali is the entire realm. 
The immeasurable part of the realm is clear to the Samyagdrsti. The immeasurable part of the realm should be seen in comparison to the movement in its own place. 5.62
In comparison to the movement in another place, the realm of the Saasadan Devas, the first one-sensed beings, is the entire realm. Their movement is in all three earths, and their extent is two Rajjus. The realm of the Vikalendriya is an immeasurable part of the realm, because they are born above the Achyutanta. Their movement is six Rajjus, which is one-eighth of the fourteen parts. The three Sanadas, the Devas, the Narakas, and the humans, are born in specific places. This means that they are eight Rajjus out of the fourteen Rajjus. The eight parts of the fourteen parts are to be seen as follows: the first eight parts are in the first three islands, the Lavana Udal, the Kaloda Udal, and the Samudra, and the second eight parts are in the Swayambhu Raman Island and the Swayambhu Raman Samudra. The remaining immeasurable islands and seas are not included. The Narakas, the Swargas, the Bhogbhumi, and the Mlechchas are all in the seventh earth, where the Saasadan and other groups have been abandoned. The five senses are born in the sixth earth, like humans. This is not correct, because the five senses are born in the Manushottara, and their realm is an immeasurable part of the realm. The five senses are born in the Naraka, the Tiryanch, the Deva, and the Lokagre Badar earth, and their extent is seven Rajjus, which is twelve parts. The Saasadan is born from the Vayu Kaya, and their extent is an immeasurable part of the realm. This is not beautiful, because the four places of the Tejas Kaya, the Naraka, the Sarvasukshma Kaya, and the Lakshana are born in specific places within the three Sanadas. The Saasadan is born everywhere except in these four places. This is the reason for the immeasurable part of the realm.
'Vajjiya Thaan Chaukka Teuu Vaaoo Yanir Ayasamham Cha. [The realm of the one-sensed beings is the entire realm, because they are found everywhere.
Annatya Savvatthaane Uvavajjadi Saasano Jeevo.' The Saasadan Jeeva is found in all places. Some places are not suitable for the touch of the Saasadan. The entire realm should be seen in comparison to the places suitable for touch. [Further, the touch is mentioned. An immeasurable number of crore Yojan Akash Pradesh is the size of one Rajju. The realm is three hundred and forty-three times the size of a cube with a side equal to the length of the Rajju. The souls move in their own place, move in another place, and are born at the end of their life. The five senses are born in the Manushottara, and their realm is an immeasurable part of the realm. The five senses are born in the Naraka, the Tiryanch, the Deva, and the Lokagre Badar earth, and their extent is seven Rajjus, which is twelve parts. The Saasadan is born from the Vayu Kaya, and their extent is an immeasurable part of the realm. This is not beautiful, because the four places of the Tejas Kaya, the Naraka, the Sarvasukshma Kaya, and the Lakshana are born in specific places within the three Sanadas. The Saasadan is born everywhere except in these four places. This is the reason for the immeasurable part of the realm. 
The five senses are born in the sixth earth, like humans. This is not correct, because the five senses are born in the Manushottara, and their realm is an immeasurable part of the realm. The five senses are born in the Naraka, the Tiryanch, the Deva, and the Lokagre Badar earth, and their extent is seven Rajjus, which is twelve parts. The Saasadan is born from the Vayu Kaya, and their extent is an immeasurable part of the realm. This is not beautiful, because the four places of the Tejas Kaya, the Naraka, the Sarvasukshma Kaya, and the Lakshana are born in specific places within the three Sanadas. The Saasadan is born everywhere except in these four places. This is the reason for the immeasurable part of the realm. 
The realm of the Vikalendriya is an immeasurable part of the realm, because the Devas, the Narakas, and the humans are born in specific places. The Vikalendriya are born in the Lavana Udal and the Kaloda Udal seas in the two and a half islands, and in the Swayambhu Raman Island and the Swayambhu Raman Samudra. They are not born in the remaining immeasurable islands and seas. They are also not born in the Narakas, the Swargas, the Bhogbhumi, and the Mlechchas in the seventh earth. The five senses are born in the sixth earth, like humans. This is not correct, because the five senses are born in the Manushottara, and their realm is an immeasurable

Page #517:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
1397
should be.  Sāsādan rajjavas are touched in comparison to parastānavihāra.  For those with samyag and mithyādrishti, the first three earths in the maranāntika samyagdristi deva's vihāra are produced in the urbandhāvasthā, and due to the rule of leaving that gunasthāna, two rajus and above, up to the achyuta svarga, the vihāra is a countless part of the loka in comparison to the parastānavihāra, and touching it makes six rajus, in this way eight out of fourteen rajus.  For those with asanyata samyagdristi, there is also touching in comparison to maranāntika, that is, eight rajus out of the fourteen rajus of sanāḍī.  This is because their field is small, as is known everywhere.  In this way, it is known that eight out of fourteen is the same as twelve out of fourteen.
In the seventh, in comparison to the production of maranāntika by those with mithyādrishti, the remaining countless part of the three lokas is left out of the six and seventh earths, including sāsādan and other gunasthānas.  The jīva with the mithyātvagunasthāna is the rule.
In comparison to parastānavihāra, there is also touching in comparison to maranāntika, because it is a rule that the maranāntika samyagdristi produces.  And
if it is not said, then the maranāntika of those who are not in naraka is produced from the sixth earth to the middle loka, five rajus, before the production of sāsādan.  And the samyagdristi does maranāntika.  And from the middle loka,
sāsādan does not go down, so according to the rule, the sāsādan is in the front part of the loka, in the bādarapṛthivīkāya, jalakāya, and
in the front part of the loka, in the bādarapṛthivīkāya, etc., there is also touching in comparison to maranāntika in the vanaspathikāya, making seven rajus, in this way twelve rajus are touched.  The sāsādan samyagdristi is produced in the vāyukāya, tejasakāya, naraka, and sarva sūksmakāya, leaving out these four places, everywhere, in comparison to the maranāntika of those with mithyādrishti.  It is clear.  Or in comparison to the production of pṛthivīkāya, etc., there.  It is also said, "Leaving out the tejasakāya, vāyukāya, naraka, and sūksma-kāya, the jīva is produced everywhere else.  The touching of the sarvaloka is to be seen in this way everywhere.  Some places are not suitable for the sāsādan, the jīva's mithyādrishti sāsādan samyagdristi deva's third earth touching, so it is said that the loka's front part, in the bādarapṛthivīkāya, etc., is less (deshon).  Further, in comparison to the places that are not suitable for touching everywhere, nine rajjavas.  It is to be known that the nine rajjavas touching is also in this way in the future.
It is to be seen.  For those with samyag and mithyādrishti, and asanyata samyagdristi,
eight rajjavas in comparison to vihāra, because there is no production in the ekaindriya.  8.76
[For those with samyag and mithyādrishti, and asanyata samyagdristi deva, in comparison to parastānavihāra,
eight rajjavas are touched in comparison to parastānavihāra.  Those with samyata and asanyata
are touched.  For those with the fifth gunasthāna of svayambhūramaṇa, in comparison to the maranāntika in the achyuta svarga, six
rajjavas are touched.  The field of those with pramatta samyata, etc., is fixed, and
because the production place is fixed in the bhavantara, and because the fourth gunasthāna is in the production,
the field of the jīvas with the gunasthāna is fixed, and the production place is also fixed in the bhavantara, and because the fourth gunasthāna is in the production,
because the field is not covered by the samacaturasra rajjū pradeśa, the countless part of the loka.  The touching of those with sayogakevali is like the field, the countless part of the loka, countless rajjū quantity, and the sarvaloka.  All narakī are produced in the samacaturasra rajjū pradeśa, and because they are not covered by the samacaturasra rajjū pradeśa, their touching is a countless part of the loka.  The production of those with sayogakevali is in the sañjñīparyāptakapancendriya, in the tiryakṣu, or in the manuṣya.  There, because the first earth is close, the narakī with the fourth gunasthāna touch a countless part of the loka below.  Because the quantity of rajjū is not there, the countless part of the loka, the countless part of the loka, and the sarvaloka.  All narakī are produced in the sañjñīparyāptakapancendriya, in the tiryakṣu, or in the manuṣya.  There, because the first earth is close, the narakī with the fourth gunasthāna touch a countless part of the loka below.  Because the quantity of rajjū is not there, the countless part of the loka, the countless part of the loka, and the sarvaloka.  All narakī are produced in the sañjñīparyāptakapancendriya, in the tiryakṣu, or in the manuṣya.  There, because the first earth is close, the narakī with the fourth gunasthāna touch a countless part of the loka below.  Because the quantity of rajjū is not there, the countless part of the loka, the countless part of the loka, and the sarvaloka.  All narakī are produced in the sañjñīparyāptakapancendriya, in the tiryakṣu, or in the manuṣya.  There, because the first earth is close, the narak

Page #518:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**3981**

The four *guna-sthana*-dwelling hell-beings constitute an infinitesimal part of the *sparmana* realm. The second earth is situated below the *madhyaloka* at the extent of one *raju*. Similarly, the third and subsequent earths are situated at an interval of one *raju* each. Therefore, the hell-beings with *mithyadrishti* and *sasadan samyagdristi* on these earths have touched at least one, two, three, four, and five *rajus*. The *samyaramadyadrishti* hell-beings, at the time of *maranantik* (death), *utpad* (birth), and *ayubandha* (life-span), regularly leave the third *guna-sthana* because these three actions do not occur in the third *guna-sthana*. Therefore, their touch, compared to their dwelling place, is an infinitesimal part of the *sparmana* realm. The touch of the restrained *samyagdristi* hell-beings is also an infinitesimal part of the realm compared to their *maranantik*, because they are regularly born as humans, and the human realm is small.

**Sarvarthasiddhi**

In the seventh earth, the hell-beings with *mithyadrishti* have touched six *rajus* compared to their *maranantik* and *utpad*. The touch of the remaining three *guna-sthana*-dwelling hell-beings is an infinitesimal part of the realm.

**Doubt:** Why is the touch of these three *guna-sthana*-dwelling hell-beings not mentioned compared to their dwelling place and *maranantik*?

**Answer:** The hell-beings of the seventh earth regularly leave those *guna-sthana* before their *maranantik* and *utpad*.

It is a rule that *sasadan samyagdristi* does not go to hell. Therefore, the touch of *sasadan samyagdristi* in the *tiryach* realm, in the *badar prithvi* and other realms, is seven *rajus* compared to their *maranantik*. The touch of humans with *mithyadrishti* is the entire realm compared to their *maranantik*. Or, it is the entire realm compared to being born as *prithvikayik* etc. humans; because the being who dies and is born somewhere is called that in the *utpad* state. For example, a being who dies as a *prithvikayik* and is born as a human is called a human in the *utpad* state. The touch of the entire realm is like this everywhere.

**1. Go. Jo. Na. | Mulachar Ga. 1134**

One should know that the hell-beings with *mithyadrishti* and *sasadan samyagdristi* who go to the third hell have a touch of nine *rajus* compared to their *maranantik* in the *badar prithvi* and other realms in the front part of the realm. One should know that the touch of nine *rajus* is like this further. And the *samyagmithyadrishti* and unrestrained *samyagdristi* are not born as *ekendriya* beings. Their touch, compared to their dwelling place, is eight *rajus*.

**§. 77**

**35.4. Panchendriyamipāvṛṣṭibhiḥ aṣṭau devān prati sarvaloko manuṣyān prati sayogakevalināṁ daṇḍādyavasthāyāṁ vāṅmanasavargaṇām avalambhyātmatra deśaparispandhābhāvātlokasya asankhyeyabhāgaḥ.**

[One should know that the touch of the five-sense *mithyadrishti* is eight *rajus* compared to the gods. That is, the five-sense *mithyadrishti* gods dwell up to the third hell. Therefore, they are found everywhere within the eight *raju* area, six *rajus* above the base of *meru* and two *rajus* below. The touch of the entire realm is compared to humans. In the state of punishment etc. of the *sayogakevali*, there is no expansion of the self in the realms due to the dependence on the categories of speech and mind. Therefore, the touch is an infinitesimal part of the realm.]

**5.85**

**37.9 Saptanarekeṣu nārakā yathāsaṅkhyametalleśyā bhavanti. Uktam ca**

"Kāla kāla tah kāuṇīlā gīlā va jīlkiṇhāe. Kiṁvā ya paramkiṇhā leśśā rayanāvipuḍavīsu ॥" (Mulachar 1134) Tatra ṣaṣṭhaprithivyāṁ kṛṣṇaleśyaiḥ sāsadanasamyagdṛṣṭibhi maraṇāntikādyapekshayā pañca pañcamaprithivyāṁ kṛṣṇaleśyāऽvivakshayā nīlaleśyaiścatasro rajjuvaḥ spṛṣṭāḥ. Tṛtīyapṛthivyāṁ nīlaleśyāvivakshayā kāpotottale rajju spṛṣṭe. Saptamaprithivyāṁ yadyapi kṛṣṇaleśyāsti tathapi maraṇāntikādyavasthāyāṁ sāsadanasya tatra na sā sambhavati tadā niyamenā mithyātvagrahaṇādīti nodāhr̥tā. Tejo leśyaiḥ saṁyatāsaṁyataḥ prathama svarge

[The hell-beings in the seven hells are of different shades as mentioned. It is said:

"Time after time, they are like a drop of water in the ocean, or like a speck of dust in the vast expanse of the sky." (Mulachar 1134)

In the sixth earth, the hell-beings with *sasadan samyagdristi* of the black shade have touched five *rajus* compared to their *maranantik* etc. In the fifth earth, the hell-beings of the blue shade, excluding the black shade, have touched four *rajus*. In the third earth, the hell-beings of the blue shade, excluding the black shade, have touched one *raju* in the *kapotottala*. In the seventh earth, although there are hell-beings of the black shade, *sasadan* is not possible there in the state of *maranantik* etc. Therefore, they are not mentioned because of the regular acceptance of *mithyatva*. The hell-beings of the luminous shade,

Page #519:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[399
The six rajus are touched by the samayika-samayika jivas with the tejo-leshya, in comparison to the maranantika, etc. The six rajus are touched by the samayika-samayika jivas with the padma-leshya, in comparison to the tyaga-vihara, etc. The five rajus are touched by the samayika-samayika jivas with the shukla-leshya, in comparison to the adho-vihara, etc. The six rajus are touched by the samayika-samayika jivas with the maranantika, etc., in comparison to the mithyadrishti, etc. But the maranantika, etc., is not mentioned here because the samayika-samayika jivas with the padma-leshya go towards mithyatva due to the rule of the padma-leshya.
The samayika-samayika jivas with the tejo-leshya have touched the six rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., up to the first heaven. The samayika-samayika jivas with the shukla-leshya have touched the six rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., up to the sahasrar heaven.
The samayika-samayika jivas with the mithyadrishti, etc., have touched the six rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., up to the sahasrar heaven.
The samayika-samayika jivas with the krishna-leshya, etc., have touched the six rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., up to the sahasrar heaven.
The samayika-samayika jivas with the tejo-leshya, etc., have touched the six rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., up to the sahasrar heaven.
It is said:
"Teu teu tah teu pammasukka ya parmasukka lesa bhavanadi devaan." (Pra. Panch. 189)
Doubt: Why are the eight rajus not touched in comparison to the vihara?
Solution: There is no need to doubt this because the shukla-leshya jivas do not have a vihara below the heavens.
As the naraki jivas have the krishna-leshya, etc., in comparison to the three leshyas, so the deva jivas have the tejo-leshya, etc., in comparison to the three leshyas.
It is said:
"Tinha donha doha chhanha donha cha terasanha cha. Etho ya chaudasamha lesa bhavanadi devaan." (Panch. Ga. 188)
This means that the tejo-leshya is the lowest in the bhavanavasi, vyantar and jyotishka devas. The tejo-leshya is the middle in the saudharma and aishana heavens. The tejo-leshya is the highest in the sanatkumar and mahendra heavens. The padma-leshya is the lowest in comparison to the tejo-leshya, etc. The padma-leshya is the middle in the brahma, brahmoत्तर, lantva, kapishtha, shukra and mahashukra heavens. The padma-leshya is the highest in the shatar and sahasrar heavens. The shukla-leshya is the lowest in comparison to the padma-leshya, etc. The shukla-leshya is the middle in the anata, pranata, arana, achyuta and nava graveyaka heavens. The shukla-leshya is the highest in the nava anudisha and pancha anusara heavens.
It is said:
"Ratnapraba adi prithviyon mein kramse tejo-leshya, kapota, kapota, kapota-nila, nila, nila-krishna, krishna and parmakrishna leshya hoti hain."
The samayika-samayika jivas with the krishna-leshya have touched the five rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., in the sixth heaven. The samayika-samayika jivas with the nila-leshya have touched the four rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., in the fifth heaven. The samayika-samayika jivas with the kapota-leshya have touched the two rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., in the third heaven. Although the krishna-leshya is present in the seventh heaven, it is not present in the bhavanavasi, etc., devas because the samayika-samayika jivas with the samayagdristi have touched the six rajus in comparison to the maranantika, etc., in the three, two, two, six, two and thirteen heavens.
There is no rule of leshya elsewhere.
[The naraki jivas have these leshyas in the seven narakas. It is said: "Ratnapraba adi prithviyon mein kramse tejo-leshya, kapota, kapota, kapota-nila, nila, nila-krishna, krishna and parmakrishna leshya hoti hain."

Page #520:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**400]**
There are no other rules for taking (food) besides these. §. 87

**39.3** Why are there not six Rajju (types of touch) for the *Kshayik* Samyaktvayukta *Sanjata* and *Sanjata* (those who have attained the state of non-attachment and non-violence), just like the other *Samyaktvayukta* *Sanjata* and *Sanjata*? There is no need for such doubt, because their field is fixed. A human being born in the realm of karma begins the destruction of the seven *Prakritis* (types of matter). Before attaining *Kshayik* Samyagdarshan (right faith), those who are bound by the lifespan of the *Tiryach* (lower animal) realm cannot attain the state of *Sanjata* and *Sanjata*.

**1**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
[**Doubt:** Why are there not six Rajju (types of touch) for the *Kshayik* Samyaktvayukta *Sanjata* and *Sanjata*, just like the other *Samyaktvayukta* *Sanjata* and *Sanjata*?
**Answer:** There is no need for such doubt, because their field is fixed. A human being born in the realm of karma begins the destruction of the seven *Prakritis* (types of matter). Before attaining *Kshayik* Samyagdarshan (right faith), those who are bound by the lifespan of the *Tiryach* (lower animal) realm cannot attain the state of *Sanjata* and *Sanjata*.

**Doubt:** How can the touch of the *Aupashmik* Samyaktvayukta *Sanjata* and *Sanjata* be an innumerable part of the world?
**Answer:** The *Aupashmik* Samyaktvayukta *Sanjata* and *Sanjata* are only among humans, because those who have attained *Aupashmik* Samyaktvayukta with *Vedak* Samyaktva (right knowledge) ascend the ladder of *Shreni* (spiritual progress) and perform *Maranantik* (death-ending) actions. Those who have attained *Aupashmik* Samyagdarshan with *Mithyatva* (false belief) cannot perform *Maranantik* actions.]

**31**
§. 89

**39.12** Why is the touch of the *Sayogakevali* (those who have attained the state of complete liberation) an innumerable part of the world?

**Answer:** In the state of *Aharak* (eating), due to the absence of the *Samchatursra Rajju* (square-shaped touch) and other types of touch, the *Sayogakevali* is *Aharak* (eating) by taking in *Pudgala* (matter) suitable for the *Audarik* and *Audarik* *Mishra* (mixed) bodies, through the *Galadana* (mouth) in the state of *Dand* (two-pronged touch) and *Kapat* (two-door touch).

It is said:
"In the state of *Dand* and *Kapat*, there is *Audarik* (pure) body touch. In the state of *Pratar* (single-door touch), there is *Audarik* *Mishra* (mixed) body touch. In the remaining three, there is *Karman* (karmic) body touch."
1. 'Kammadao Ses Tattva Janhari' || Prao. Pansa 1/199

Due to the small area of the *Pinda* (body) in the *Dand* and *Kapat* states, and the absence of the *Samchatursra Rajju* (square-shaped touch) and other types of touch, the touch of the *Sayogakevali* is an innumerable part of the world. In the case of *Anaharak* (non-eating) *Sasa* (those who have attained the state of non-attachment and non-violence), there are five Rajju (types of touch) because they are born in the *Tiryach* (lower animal) realm from the sixth earth, and eleven Rajju because they are born in the *Tiryach* realm from the *Achyuta* (heavenly) realm.

**Doubt:** Previously, twelve Rajju were mentioned, and now eleven are mentioned. Is this a contradiction?

**Answer:** This is not a contradiction, because the previous statement was made with reference to the *Maranantik* (death-ending) state. In the *Maranantik* state, there is no *Anaharak* (non-eating) state. The *Sasa* performs *Maranantik* actions in the *Erkendriya* (five senses) state, not in the *Utpad* (birth) state. At that time, the *Sasa* loses the state of *Sasa* (non-attachment and non-violence).

Page #521:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[401
Doubt- First you said twelve Rajus, now you have said twelve Tapas after eight years of Nissanta Maharta. Doesn't this contradict the previous statement? It is not appropriate to say that the remaining are created after the completion of all the purposes and then they fall back. First, the Marana-Kotia-Ayur-Utpann-Astavarsha-Antar-Samyama-Adadeti. In the context of the near-death state, the twelve Rajus are said to be the least time. Because, all beings are different in their transformations. But in the near-death state, the being, being a dead body without food, first attains the non-distracted quality. After that, it does not happen, but in the state of production, it is non-food. The distracted quality is the side. There, it is in the state of the quality. In the state of one-sense, the one who has attained the right vision, in the remaining time of his own life, attains the distracted quality and dies. It does not produce, because the time is the least for the one-being in the state of production, and in the state of non-distraction, the state of being nourished is lost.
So, at the end of his own life, he attains the distracted quality and dies.
Even for the distracted one-being, the least time is four Upa-Shamakas, up to forty-five, as far as possible, simultaneously. 40.1 Time- The least time is one Muhurta, even thousands of Muhurtas, even though there is a possibility of entering death, the quantity of breaths is seventy-three more than seven hundred, in relation to different beings, in relation to one being. The least time is one Muhurta. Now, even for the wrong vision, there is one time, why is it not possible to have a Muhurta, a longer time, an Avali, etc. within it? This is not justified, because the time of attaining wrong vision is very large. If this is so, there will be countless differences. Because death is not possible within a Muhurta. It is said,
'The one who has attained wrong vision, with countless connections. 'Three thousand, with a hundred, always, thirteen breaths. As long as the Avali-Pako is within the Muhurta, there is no mind. This is the greatest of all human beings.
Even in the case of right and wrong vision, at the time of death, due to the abandonment of that quality state, there is a change of half a Pudgala, which is less than the excellence. And that is possible for the transmigrating being. The one who has attained restraint, the restrained, the restrained quality, and the liberated ones' (T. Su. 2,10) will be discussed later. The one who is nourished dies within a Muhurta, so for the non-restrained, restrained, and restrained one-being, there are six Avalis in excellence. Even one Avali is one time. For the four Upa-Shamakas, the non-Kevali, there is countless time.
And because of the possibility of liberation, there is no possibility of death within the interval, the least time is less than the one-being, and the greatest time is within the Muhurta. For the one who has attained the Kevali, one 'Avali' is countless time. Avali is the breath.
For the one-being, the least time is one Muhurta, after attaining that quality state, the breath is the least, the least, the least, the least.
In the middle of the Muhurta, after attaining the non-quality state. In excellence, the previous 'thirty-three Balva, Nali-Benaliya, the greatest is.
After eight years of Koti, taking up Tapas, only produces. Thirty Muhurtas, a day, fifteen days, it is ripe.
Because of the deficiency of years, it is less. So it is said. For the one-being of right and wrong vision, the least time is the least Muhurta, and in excellence, the greatest time is the Muhurta. [Now, the time is being told. The least time is one Muhurta, after that, the quality changes, it should be understood later. Non-restrained, right-vision, one-being, in excellence, there are thirty oceans of Muhurtas. Within it, there is a Muhurta. There are many more. Because, some being, in the previous Koti-Ayur-Utpann-
1. Go. Ji. 573. 2. Go. Ji. 574. 'Egasamaena Heena Bhinna Muhutta Tado Ses' iti Uttarardhapatha Jamboo. Po. 13/5-6. 3. The death should be understood at the time of the descent of the previous action. In the first part of the ascending previous action- 'Missahara-Ssa Ya Khavagacha Dhamanapadam Puvva Ya. Padamuvasamma Tama Tamaguna Padivanna Ya Na Maranti.' According to the Agam, there is no death. Now, it should not be doubted that even the four Upa-Shamakas, having attained their respective quality states from the lower quality states, stay there for one time each, and then there is one time each for them. Because, it is not possible, and if it is possible, it will contradict the statement that the least time is between the least and the Muhurta. It will be discussed later that the least time for the four Upa-Shamakas is one Muhurta for the one-being.

Page #522:
---------------------------
## 402]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

The **antarmuhurt** is a very short period of time. Thus, there are countless variations of the **antarmuhurt** for the **guna sthana** of a living being, compared to a single being. It is also said, "Time is also a moment." For all four **upshamaka**s, as in "All humans have a **muhurt** of entry and residence together, up to the number of 3,773 **uccha**-possible 54."

Compared to a single being, the time of death for many beings is a very short period. The **utkrista** time is slightly less than half a **pudgala** change.

**Doubt:** In this way, the time of death for a **mithyadristi** is also a moment. Why is it not mentioned in the sutra "**sansarinon muktashcha**"? We will address this later. The time of the **sasadan** **guna sthana** is one **avali** (compared to a single being, it is six **avali**s).

**Answer:** It is not correct to say so. There is one **avali** of **mithyatva** **guna** time. It is said, "The death of a being who has attained countless **sthana**s occurs in one **avali** of time of the **antarmuhurt**. The middle of a countable **avali** is impossible. It is said, "An **ananta anubandhi** has one **ucchavasa**. Seven **ucchavasa**s make one **visanayojan** for a **vedaka** who is **samyakdristi** and has a **mithyatva** **stoka**. Seven **stoka**s make one **lava**. When a **guna sthana** is attained, there are 37.5 **lava**s in one **avali** time. Two **nalis** do not have the **udaya** of an **ananta anubandhi**, and one **anta** is one **muhurt**. Thirty **muhurt**s make one day. Death does not occur until the **muhurt** time. **Samyak** and **mithyadristi** both have a **muhurt** time, and fifteen days make one **paksha**.

The time of death for a **mithyadristi** is not a moment because they lose their **guna sthana** when the time of death arrives. The time of the **asanyata** and **samyata-asanyata** **guna sthana** is much shorter than the **antarmuhurt** of a single being, and they do not die until the **muhurt**. Therefore, the **asanyata** and **samyata-asanyata** **guna sthana** have a longer **antarmuhurt**. The **antarmuhurt** is further multiplied. This should be understood later.

The time of the **asanyata-samyakdristi** **guna sthana** is slightly more than 33 **sagara**s compared to a single being. This is because **kshapika**s and **ayogakevali**s are able to attain **moksha** and therefore do not die in the **avantar**.

The explanation is as follows: A being is born with a lifespan of one **purvakoti**. After one **antarmuhurt**, they attain **samyaktva** and **tapasya**, and are born in **sarvarthasiddhi**. After leaving there, they are born again with a lifespan of one **purvakoti**. After eight years, they attain the **ayogakevali** **guna sthana**. The **utkrista** time is slightly less than one **purvakoti** because they attain **kevalgyan** after eight years of **tapasya** from birth. Therefore, there are a few years less in the **purvakoti**.

The time of the **pramatta** and **apramatta** **guna sthana** is a moment compared to a single being. This is because all beings first attain the **apramatta** **guna sthana** due to the influence of specific **parinama**s. After that, they attain the **pramatta** **guna sthana**, which is its opposite. Therefore, a being in the **tiryag** **sanayata-samyakdristi** **guna sthana** dies after attaining the **apramatta** **guna sthana** when one moment remains in their lifespan. After that, they change their **gati**.

The time of the **tiryag** **asanyata-samyakdristi** **guna sthana** is a moment compared to a single being. A being in the **darshan-moha** **kshay** **guna sthana** dies after attaining the **pramatta** **guna sthana** when one moment remains in their lifespan. After that, they change their **gati**.

A **vedaka** who is **samyakdristi** and has one moment remaining in their lifespan is three **palyopamana**s compared to a **darshan-moha** **kshay** **vedaka**.

Page #523:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
§. 93
A being, having become one-sensed, experiences three hundred and thirty-one births and deaths, in the highest degree, in comparison to a single human being with a false view, for a period of forty-seven previous kotis.  Another comparison:  seventy-four previous kotis, due to the distinctness of the previous kotis.  The same being, in the middle of that very moment, experiences more than a koti.  Thus, having become a neuter, female, or male, with two, three, four, or five senses, it experiences forty-four births and deaths in the interval between the arising of the lifespan of a previous koti, in accordance with the number eighty, sixty, forty, and twenty-four, due to the diversity of its own karma.  All these, when combined, amount to one hundred and sixty-six thousand three hundred and thirty-six.  It is said:
"In the middle of a moment, eight times are produced the small births and deaths of a human being who is a small birth.  Again, eight times are produced with a neuter or female, but seven times with a male.  Then, with a lifespan of three palya, it is born in the realm of enjoyment.  By rule, those born in the realm of enjoyment are born in the heavens.  Afterwards, there is a change of destiny.  In the highest degree, in comparison to a single human being with an unrestrained right view, there are three palya.  For a human being born in the realm of karma, whether he is endowed with the right view of a destroyer or with the right view of a destroyer of the knowledge of the veiling of perception, is born among the human beings of the realm of enjoyment.  Thus, because of not abandoning the human destiny, there are three palya, in excess, afterwards there is a change of destiny."
[In the human destiny, the time of the false view guna-sthana, in comparison to a single being, is three palya, in excess, due to the distinctness of the previous kotis, that is, forty-seven previous kotis.  Its explanation is as follows:  with a neuter, female, and male, it is born eight times with a lifespan of a previous koti, and in the interval, within a moment, it is born eight times with the small birth of a human being who is a small birth.  Afterwards, it is born again eight times with a neuter or female, but seven times with a male.  Then, it is born in the realm of enjoyment with a lifespan of three palya.  Beings born in the realm of enjoyment are born in the heavens by rule.  Therefore, afterwards, its destiny changes.  In the highest degree, in comparison to a single being with an unrestrained right view, the time of the guna-sthana is three palya.  For a human being born in the realm of karma (bound human lifespan), whether he is endowed with the right view of a destroyer or with the right view of a destroyer of the knowledge of the veiling of perception, is born among the human beings of the realm of enjoyment.  Therefore, because of not abandoning the human destiny, there is a time of three palya, in excess.  Afterwards, its destiny changes.]

[403
"Three hundred and thirty-six births and deaths, sixty-six thousand.  Thus, the small births are.  In the middle of a moment.  Know that eighty, sixty, forty, are the small births of the विकलेन्द्रिय.  Twenty-five are the small births of the five-sensed, in the middle of a moment."
When there are so many births and deaths in the middle of a moment (within a moment), then eighteen births and deaths are obtained in a single breath.  Of these, one is called a small birth.  What is that?  It is said:  in the moment described above, in the highest degree, there is infinite time, which is characterized by the transformation of innumerable pudgalas, and which is continuously one-sensed, dying and being reborn.  Then, it becomes विकलेन्द्रिय or five-sensed.
[The smallest time, in comparison to a single one-sensed being, is the grasping of a small birth.  How that small birth is, is said:  in the moment described above, a being, having become one-sensed, experiences sixty-six thousand one hundred and thirty-two births and deaths.  And the same being, within that very moment, experiences eighty, sixty, forty, and twenty-four births and deaths, in accordance with the number, having become two-sensed, three-sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed, due to the diversity of its own karma-bond.  All these small births, when combined, amount to sixty-six thousand three hundred and thirty-six.  It is said:  "Sixty-six thousand three hundred and thirty-six births and deaths.  Thus many small births are.  In the middle of a moment.  Know that eighty, sixty, and forty are the small births of the विकलेन्द्रिय.  Twenty-five are the small births of the five-sensed, in the middle of a moment."
§. 95
When there are so many births and deaths within a moment (within a moment), then eighteen births and deaths are obtained in a single breath.  Of these, one is called a small birth.  णम्.  What is that?  It is said:  in the moment described above, in the highest degree, there is infinite time, which is characterized by the transformation of innumerable pudgalas,
42.7
the smallest time, in comparison to a single one-sensed being, is the grasping of a small birth.
1. गो० जी० मा० 122,123 2. कल्लाणा- लोयणा 6.

Page #524:
---------------------------
Sarvārthasiddhi

In this time period, the one-sensed beings are constantly dying and being reborn. Some of them, endowed with additional qualities, continue to take birth again and again through the voice-body or mind-body. Later, at the end of the time period of the imperfect or the perfect senses, they become either five-sensed or five-sensed-and-mind.

The transition from wrong belief to right belief, and the transition of other yogas (activities of the body, speech, and mind) experienced by them, occurs at the end of the time period of the right or wrong belief. This is also the case for the ascetics and the quiescent ones.

Regarding the five-sensed being with wrong belief, it should be understood that the duration of its yoga (activity of the body, speech, and mind) is the longest, exceeding the duration of the yogas of the other beings by ninety-six previous infinite time periods. Similarly, the duration of the male, female, and neuter Vedas is also the longest.

The being with the Vedas is born eight times with the consciousness of being named, and eight times without the consciousness of being named, within the duration of one previous infinite time period.

In the same way, the transition of yoga and the transition of the stages of spiritual development should be understood for the mobile beings as well, with the difference that the duration is the shortest, being only one time period, exceeding the previous infinite time periods by ninety-six.

The transition of the yoga and the stages of spiritual development for the ascetics and the quiescent ones should be understood in the same way as for the mind-yogis.

Page #525:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[405
6. 98
43.8 A single being with false belief and female-knowledge has a short time period, from the lowest to the inner-moment. Then there is a transition to another quality. From the highest, there is a time period of one hundred palya-upam-prthaktva. For example, a being with female-knowledge binds the lifespan of a deva with false belief. Then, from there, it is born in the realm of animals and humans. 8. 100
44.8 A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration has a time period of thirty-three oceans, from the lowest to the highest, compared to a naraka. It is sufficient that then, the being abandons the female-knowledge. A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration, who is not restrained by female-knowledge, attains knowledge of disintegration. Therefore, it is sufficient that the inner-moment, which is the completion of the sufficient time period, is reduced by five hundred palya-upam, due to the inferiority of the state. Since there is no production of right belief from female-knowledge, it is sufficient that the being will attain right belief. The inner-moment, which is the completion of the sufficient time period, is reduced by the inferiority of the state. [A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration has a time period of thirty-three oceans, from the highest to the lowest, compared to a naraka. 
A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration, who is not restrained by neuter-knowledge, has a time period of thirty-three oceans in the seventh earth, from the highest to the lowest, compared to a naraka. It is sufficient that the being attains knowledge of disintegration. Therefore, it is sufficient that the inner-moment, which is the completion of the sufficient time period, is reduced by the inferiority of the state. The being should attain right belief.
[A single being with false belief and female-knowledge has a short time period, from the lowest to the inner-moment. Then, there is a transition to another quality. 
. 103
45.3 A single being with false belief and knowledge of black, blue, or pigeon-like color has a short time period, from the lowest to the inner-moment, compared to animals and humans. There is a possibility of their color changing. The inner-moment, which is the completion of the sufficient time period, should be seen as being reduced by the inferiority of the state, compared to animals and humans. From the highest, there is a time period of one hundred palya-upam-prthaktva, compared to a naraka. In this way, the being remains with female-knowledge until the seventh, fifth, and third earth, up to one hundred palya-upam-prthaktva, excluding naraka and sammochchana. Then, the being abandons the female-knowledge. A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration, who is not restrained by female-knowledge, has a time period of seventeen oceans, from the highest to the lowest, compared to deva and naraka. Due to the inferiority of the state, the being wanders with the rule of the color. The being wanders with the rule of the color. There is no rule, therefore, it is excessive. The said color is present. A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration, who is not restrained by right belief, has a time period of fifty-five palya-upam, from the highest to the lowest, compared to a naraka. The inner-moment, which is the completion of the sufficient time period, is reduced by the inferiority of the state. Since right belief is not produced with female-knowledge, the being with female-knowledge attains right belief in the sufficient state. Therefore, the inner-moment, which is the completion of the sufficient time period, is reduced by the inferiority of the state. (It is reduced by fifty-five palya-upam). A single being with false belief and knowledge of disintegration, who is not restrained by right belief, has a time period of two oceans, from the highest to the lowest, compared to deva, in the first, twelfth, and eighteenth heaven. Because there is a possibility of the production of the state of maranantika, it is excessive. A single being with false belief and knowledge of white color has a time period of thirty oceans, from the highest to the lowest, compared to the deva of the first, second, and third heaven. The being attains right belief after resting for some time in the state of maranantika, becoming pure. Therefore, it is reduced by the inferiority of the state. 
8..99
44.5 A single being with false belief and knowledge of four kashayas, from the beginning of false belief to the end of apramatta, has a short time period, from the lowest to the inner-moment, compared to a being with the mind-oriented quality. 
[A single being with false belief and knowledge of black, blue, or pigeon-like color has a short time period, from the lowest to the inner-moment, compared to animals and humans. 
[The four kashayas, from false belief to the end of apramatta, have a short time period, from the lowest to the inner-moment, compared to a single being with the mind-oriented quality.

Page #526:
---------------------------
##  [406]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
It is possible. There may be a moment of time (antarmuhūrta) for all beings with leshya. This is not correct, because it is characterized by a large number of time units. One should look at the perspective of animals and humans. Due to the excellence of a small number of time units in an incalculable fraction (āvalikāsaṃkhyeya), the time for hell beings is seven, five, and three oceans respectively, compared to the time for gods and humans. For the liberated souls (sayogakevali), the time is thirty-three oceans, seventeen oceans, and three oceans respectively, compared to various beings, because they initiate the punishment, etc., at the same time. The time for the most excellent hell beings is incalculable, because they are in a state of suffering. When they go to punishment, etc., in a continuous uneven time, characterized by an incalculable number of time units, they initiate it with the same leshya. For one being, the time is the least and the most excellent, but there are no rules for coming from there, so there is some time that is three times the time for filling two worlds (prataradvyalokapūraṇalakṣaṇāḥ). The time mentioned is more. For the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi), the time is thirty-three oceans, etc., compared to one being with leshya, because the time for hell beings is the most excellent, compared to one being with the least excellent leshya (āhārakāma mithyādṛṣṭi). 

There is a moment of time (antarmuhūrta) for one being, because it is born in a small world (kṣudra bhave) by going in a crooked path (vakragati), and again goes in a crooked path. It is born and dies again, going in a crooked path, and does not attain right faith (samyaktva) in the final annihilation (māranāntika) in the seventh earth. It remains without food (anāhārak) and becomes a food-eater (āhārak) in the middle. Therefore, there is some less time mentioned. The incalculable fraction of the incalculable number of time units of the ascending and descending (utsapiṇī-avasarpiṇī) time is the measure of the time for the blazing (tejo) and the foot-leshya (padāleśyā) wrong faith (mithyādṛṣṭi) and the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi). The time for one being with the most excellent leshya is incalculable, compared to the time for one being with the least excellent leshya, because the measure of doubt (śaṅkā) and āvalikā is incalculable. Therefore, the time for the first and twelfth heavens is two oceans, compared to the time for the eighteenth heaven, which is eighteen oceans. 

It is not correct to say that the time for those beings with the mentioned state is incalculable, because the time for the final annihilation and birth is possible. Therefore, it is necessary to take some more time mentioned. The measure of time for the wrong faith (mithyādṛṣṭi) with white leshya (śuklaleśyā) is a small incalculable number, compared to the time for one being with the most excellent leshya. The time for the gods of the highest graveya is thirty-one oceans. There is also white leshya in their final annihilation and birth. Therefore, the time for the liberated souls (sayogakevali) is some more than thirty-one oceans, compared to various beings. The time for the restrained (samyata) and the unrestrained (asanyata) with the qualities of the stages (guṇasthāna) with white leshya (śuklaleśyā) is three times, compared to one being with the least excellent leshya, because they initiate the punishment, etc., at the same time. The time for the qualities of the stages (guṇasthāna) and the change of leshya (leśyāparivartana) is a medium number, compared to the time for one being with the most excellent leshya. The time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with the qualities of the stages (guṇasthāna) is one time, and the time for the most excellent is a moment of time (antarmuhūrta). 

They initiate the punishment, etc., at different times. The time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is three times, compared to one being, because the time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is the least excellent, and the time for the most excellent is three times. The time for the two worlds (pratar) and one world-filling (lokapūraṇa) punishment is one time, compared to one being with wrong faith (mithyādṛṣṭi). The time for the least excellent is a moment of time (antarmuhūrta). It is born in a small world (kṣudra bhave) by going in a crooked path (vakraṇa gataḥ). It goes again in a crooked path (vakreṇa gataḥ). The incalculable fraction of the incalculable number of time units of the ascending and descending (utsapiṇī-avasarpiṇī) time is the measure of the time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi), because it always goes in a straight path (śaśvadṛjugatimattvāt). The time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is one time, compared to one being with wrong faith (mithyādṛṣṭi). The time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is sixty-six oceans, compared to various beings, because the time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is the most excellent. The incalculable fraction of the āvalikā is one time, because the time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is characterized by a large number of time units. The time for the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is one time, because it remains only for that much time. Again, in the middle, the unrestrained (asanyata) with right faith (samyagdṛṣṭi) is a food-eater (āhārak) until the moment of time (antarmuhūrta), because it goes in a crooked path (vakragati) at the beginning and end.

Page #527:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[407
Until the end of the Antarmahat, he attains Samyamithyatva. Again, he remains in the state of Vedak Samyaktv for sixty-four Sagars. At the end of the last Sagar, he attains Mithyatva, as per the Deshon.
48.4 For a Tiryanch Mithyatva-drishti, the Antarkal for a single Jiva is three Palyopamas, which is an immeasurable fraction of the Antarkal for a Sasadan Jiva.
Palyopamas are the difference in Antarkal. If someone asks why it is not more, or why it is not Antarmahat, then the answer is that a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is not born in the Tiryanch realm, because he is eligible to attain Sasadan guna. He is born in the Dev realm. Therefore, a Mithyatva-drishti who has attained the state of Tri-Palyopamas, and who is in the state of Aupashamik Samyaktv, is born in the Bhogabhoomi realm during the time between attaining Mithyatva and attaining Samyaktv. The Jiva born there is called a Sasadan. His Mithyatva lasts for a little more than forty-eight days, after which he becomes eligible to attain Aupashamik Samyaktv. The time it takes to become eligible to attain Vedak Samyaktv is an immeasurable fraction of the time it takes to become eligible to attain Aupashamik Samyaktv. This is the rule. Therefore, after that many days have passed, he attains Samyaktv by abandoning Mithyatva, and he attains the state of Tri-Palyopamas.
If he attains Mithyatva again at the end of his lifespan, then the Antarkal is less than forty-eight days, because it is less than the time of gestation and the time remaining after the last forty-eight days. [Further, Antaraka says that the Antarkal for a Mithyatva-drishti for a single Jiva is two sixty-four Sagars, which is greater than the Antarkal for a Tiryanch Mithyatva-drishti, which is three sixty-four Sagars. This is because the Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv remains for sixty-four Sagars. The Antarkal is Palyopamas. At the end of the last Sagar, he remains in Mithyatva for a short time. Thus, the Deshon is two sixty-four Sagars. For a Tiryanch and a Manushya, the Antarkal is a little more than forty-eight days. As the days pass, the Jiva becomes eligible to attain Samyaktv. The Antarkal is an immeasurable fraction of the Palyopamas.
Doubt: Why is it not more?
Answer: This is not a valid argument, because a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is not born in the Tiryanch realm. He is born in the Dev realm. Therefore, the Antarkal for a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is only sixty-four Sagars.
Doubt: Why is the Antarmahat not the Antarkal?
Answer: This is not a valid argument, because a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is not born in the Tiryanch realm. He is born in the Dev realm. Therefore, the Antarkal for a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is only sixty-four Sagars.
Doubt: Why is it not more than three Palyopamas?
Answer: This is not a valid argument, because a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is not born in the Tiryanch realm. He is born in the Dev realm. Therefore, the Antarkal for a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is only sixty-four Sagars.
Doubt: Why is the Antarmahat not the Antarkal?
Answer: This is not a valid argument, because a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is not born in the Tiryanch realm. He is born in the Dev realm. Therefore, the Antarkal for a Jiva with Vedak Samyaktv is only sixty-four Sagars.
6. 111
49.6 For a Manushya, the Antarkal for a Sasadan Samyaktv-drishti, a Samyamithyatva-drishti, and an Asanyat Samyaktv-drishti is three Palyopamas, which is greater than the Antarkal for a Jiva with the same guna but who is born in a previous Koti.
1. In Dhavala, 5, p. 7, it is said that a Jiva attains Samyamithyatva only when the Antarmahat time remains in the first sixty-four Sagars. -San.
2. In Dhavala, 5, p. 32, it is said that the Antarkal for a Jiva with three Palyopamas is two months more than the time of the first Mahart, and less than the two Antarmahats that are available at the end of the lifespan. -San.

Page #528:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**408]**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

[In the human realm, a *Sāsādan Samyagdṛṣṭi*, *Samyagmithyādṛṣṭi*, and a *Ekaindriyajīva* born among the *Vikaleindriyās* become an *Asanyata Samyagdṛṣṭi* and are reborn in the *Ekaindriya* realm. In this case, there is an interval. However, when the *Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva Kāla* has passed, it is possible for the *Guṇasthāna* to change in the *Pañcendriya* realm born in the *Bhoga Bhūmi*. Therefore, they do. Later, they take on their own *Guṇasthāna*. In this way, one should consider the interval between *Mithyātva* etc. and *Samyaktva* etc. as a *Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* due to the *Utkarsa* of one being. There is an interval of more than three *Palya Upama*.]

**8. 114 $ 112**
**51.5** The interval between *Pṛthivīkāyikās* and *Vanaspatikāyikās* is an *Asankhyeya* number of *Pudalaparāvartās* due to the *Utkarsa* of one being in the *Devagati* with *Mithyādṛṣṭi*. These are like the *Naraantara Niśatsāgara Upama*. For example, a being with *Mithyātva* is born among the *Vanaspatikāyikās* and then becomes a *Pṛthivīkāyikās* etc. due to the *Utkarsa*. The interval is thirty *Sāgaras* because the time is short. The *Mithyātva* returns at the end of the time remaining. Otherwise, there would be a change in the *Gati*. This is the *Deśona*.
**50.5** Similarly, the interval between *Vanaspatikāyikās* and *Pṛthivīkāyikās* etc. is an *Asankhyeya* number of *Lokas* due to the *Utkarsa*. This is because the time for *Vanaspatikāyikās* to become *Pṛthivīkāyikās* etc. is short.
**8. 115** A *Dravyalinga* *Mithyādṛṣṭi* was born in the *Uparimaveyak*. Later, he took on *Samyaktva* and remained for thirty *Sāgaras*. At the end of the time, he became a *Mithyādṛṣṭi* again.
**52.3** If this were not the case, the *Gati* would change. Therefore, *Deśona*.
**50.9** There is no interval between the *Guṇasthānas* of *Kāyavāḍ*, *Manasayogi* etc. with *Mithyādṛṣṭi* etc. and the *Nānakajīvas*.
**8. 113** **Question:** Why is there no interval with respect to one being?
**Answer:** Because the time for *Kāyādīyoga* is an *Antarmūhūrta Kāla*. Therefore, it is possible for the *Mithyātva* etc. *Guṇasthāna* of a being residing in *Kāyādīyoga* to change to another *Guṇasthāna* and then return to the same *Guṇasthāna*.
**53.6** Similarly, there is no interval between *Sāsādan Samyagdṛṣṭi* etc. and one being.
**5. 117** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The word *Pumvede* is used separately for the two *Kṣapakas*.
**50.9** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The word *Pumvede* is used separately for the two *Kṣapakas*.
**50.9** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The word *Pumvede* is used separately for the two *Kṣapakas*.
**50.9** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The word *Pumvede* is used separately for the two *Kṣapakas*.
**50.9** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The word *Pumvede* is used separately for the two *Kṣapakas*.
**50.9** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The word *Pumvede* is used separately for the two *Kṣapakas*.
**50.9** The interval for a *Ekaindriyajīva* to become a *Dve Sāgara Upama Sahasra Pūrva Koṭi Pṛthaktva* is sixty-nine *Pūrva Koṭis* plus two thousand *Sāgaras*.
**53.6** The

Page #529:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[409
From the absence of Veda. Compared to the various living beings, the year is more excellent than the four koti of the Upaśamaka. The Upaśama श्रेणी is eight months more than the eighteen months.
The fallen ones do not abandon the knowledge of Manahparyaya, they are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is absent. They are deluded and deluded [in the Purusha Veda, the two 'Kshapaka' are mentioned separately because they are in the Guna sthāna, because the remaining time of the previous koti is there. The reason for this is that the Veda is

Page #530:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**410]**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
**6. 129**
(Slightly less) than a *purvakoti* time period remains, then again *upasham* is abundant. ] Ascends the *shreni*. In this way, *deshon* is the difference.
**6. 125**
*Kotik* difference occurs. ]
**57. 10**
For those who are not heedless in *shuklaleshya*, *upasham* *shreni* ascension,
**6. 121**
*Abhimukhyarohan* and *sadbhavadhyam* are the reasons for the difference in *leshya* and the return.
**55. 5**
In the case of two *upasham* practitioners who are *samayik* *chhed* *upasthapan* *shuddhi* *samyata*, the difference between them is less than a *purvakoti* time period, because the *upashanta* *kshaya* practitioner, having fallen, touches the difference in *leshya* and then ascends the *shreni* due to the excellence of the *shamak* practitioner.
**[**In *shuklaleshya*, a *samyata* practitioner who is not heedless, remains for as long as the *purvakoti* time period remains, and then again ascends the *shreni*.
**6. 125**
The difference between the lowest and the highest is an *antarmuhurt* because *deshon* is the difference. In *sukshmasampray* *samyama*, there is no difference for the *upasham* practitioner because of the absence of *samyama* in the difference in qualities.
**57. 10**
In the case of those who are not *samyata* in the lowest *gana*, the difference between them and a *mithyadristi* practitioner is less than thirty-three *sagars* because a *mithyadristi* practitioner is born in the seventh *bhuvi*. After an *antarmuhurt* has passed, he takes on *samyaktva*.
**55. 5**
The difference between the lowest and the highest is also an *antarmuhurt*. In this time period, *leshya* does not remain for an *antarmuhurt*. This is *deshon*.
**]**
There is no difference for the *upashanta* *kshaya* practitioner because the *upashanta* practitioner is excellent in relation to the *kshaya* practitioner. The difference in *leshya* is less than a *purvakoti* time period because a human being with a *purvakoti* lifespan ascends the *shreni* only after eight years. Having taken on *samyama*, he ascends the *upasham* *shreni* and falls. In the *pramatta* and *aprammatta* *gunasthanas*,
**3.**
He remains for as long as the *purvakoti* time period remains, and then again ascends the *upasham* *shreni*. In this way, *deshon* occurs.
**58. 10**
The difference between *aupashamika* *samyata* *samyagdristi* practitioners is seven nights and days in relation to other beings.
**[***Aupashamika* is abundant. In *sakshmasampray* *samyama*, there is no difference for the *upasham* practitioner because *sukshmasampray* *samyama* occurs only in the tenth *ganasthan*. In the case of those who are not *samyata*, the difference between a *mithyadristi* practitioner and a *samyata* practitioner is less than thirty-three *sagars* because a *mithyadristi* practitioner is born in the seventh *bhuvi*. After an *antarmuhurt* has passed, he takes on *samyaktva*. After an *antarmuhurt* has passed, he abandons *samyaktva* and returns to *mithyatva*. In this way, *deshon* is the difference of thirty-three *sagars*.
**]**
There is no difference for the *upashanta* *kshaya* practitioner because the *vedaka* *purva* *upashamika* practitioner is part of the *shreni* ascension. Having fallen, he does not ascend the *shreni* with the same *shreni* ascension. He takes on *samyaktva* after going to *mithyatva*, and then ascends the *shreni*. Therefore, there is no difference.
**8. 124**
There is no difference for the *samana* *samyag* *mithyatva* *mithyatva* practitioner because of the difference in *leshya*.
**57. 1**
In the case of *tejo* *padma* *leshya* practitioners who are *samyata* and not *samyata*, *pramatta* and not *pramatta*, there is no difference in relation to other beings because the *leshya* changes in an *antarmuhurt*.
**[**The difference between *aupashamika* *asamya* *samyagdristi* practitioners is seven nights and days in relation to other beings.
**]**
There is no difference for the *yukta* practitioner in relation to other beings because of the opposition of qualities to other qualities.
In the case of those who are in the *sasadana* etc. *ganas*, the difference is due to *mithyatva* etc.
*Tejo* *leshya* and *padma* *leshya* practitioners who are *samyata* and not *samyata*, *pramatta* and not *pramatta*, are not different in relation to other beings because the *leshya* changes in an *antarmuhurt*.
**[**The difference between *aupashamika* *asamya* *samyagdristi* practitioners is seven nights and days in relation to other beings.
**]**

Page #531:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[411
If any living being takes up the state of  *aupashamik samyaktv* for three periods of time. If the time of their *gunasthan* does not exceed that, then there is no taking up for seven nights and days. Therefore, there is no possibility of a difference from their other *gunasthan*. With *aupashamik samyaktv*, the difference in time for *sanyata* and *asanyata* is fourteen days, and for *pramatta* and *aprammatta* it is fifteen days. For one living being, the minimum difference in time is the minimum *antarmuhurta*, and the maximum is 61.1. The meaning is: the *mithyadristi* is the *audayik* state, and the maximum difference in time is the maximum *antarmuhurta*. It is said:
*Mithyatva prakruter udaye pradur bhavat*. The difference in time for *sasadan samyaktv* and *aupashamik samyaktv* is seven days,
*Dristiriti parinamik bhavah*. Now, with *ananta anubandhi aupashamik samyaktv*, the difference in time for *virata* and *avirata* is fourteen days, and for *virata* it is fifteen days.
*Krodhady daye'sya pradur bhavad idayiktvam kasman nochyata* Why is it not said that this is *audayik* due to the arising of *krodha* etc.?
*iti cet, avivakshitvat*. It is only necessary to know the days in relation to *darshan moha*.
*Mithyadristiyadi gunasthan chatushtaye bhavo nirupyitum upashanta kshaya ka ek jiva ke prati antar nahin hai*. It is intended to explain the four *gunasthan* of *mithyadristi* etc. Therefore, there is no difference for one living being in *sasadan samyaktv*, *samyak mithyatva*, and both of these, because the living being ascends the *upasham shreni* with *aupashamik samyaktv*, which arises from *vedak samyaktv*, and the three types of *darshan moha* - arising, destruction, and the appearance of destruction-pacification.
*Vat parinamiktvam*. The *samyak mithyadristi* is the *kshayopashamik* state. When it falls from that, it does not ascend the *shreni* of the same *samyaktv* again, but takes up another *samyaktv*.
*Nanu sarvaghatinam udya bhaave desha aaroha nahin karta kintu anya samyaktvako grahan ghatinam chodaye ya utpadyate bhavah sa kshayopashamik*. It does not ascend the *shreni* by taking up another *samyaktv* or by going into *mithyatva* and then taking up *samyaktv* again, because the *samyak mithyatva prakrti* cannot be *desha ghatit*.
*Na cha samyamithyatva prakrter desha dhatitvam sambhavati, karake tab shrenipar aaroha karta hai*. Therefore, there is no difference in it.
*Atah usaka sarvaghatitvena agame tasyah pratipaditvat iti*. It is established that it is *sarvaghatit* in the *agame*.
*Tada antar nahin hai*. There is no difference in that.
*Sasadan samyaktv, samyak mithyatva yuktam, upcharatastasya desha ghatitvasya api sambhavat*. It is appropriate that *sasadan samyaktv* and *samyak mithyatva* are connected, because it is possible for it to be *desha ghatit* by convention.
*Aur mithyatvase yukta ek jiva ke prati antar nahin hai*. There is no difference for one living being connected with *mithyatva*.
*Upchar nimittam cha deshata samyaktvasy ghatitvam, na hi*. It is *desha ghatit* by convention, because the *samyaktv* is not destroyed by the *mithyatva* in the same *gunasthan*, because the *mithyatva* of a living being situated in the *gunasthan* of *sadan* etc. cannot be different from the *gunasthan* of *samyak mithyatva* (the form of *samyaktv*).
*Mithyatva prakrtivat samyag mithyatva prakritya sarvasya dan adi gunasthaname sthita jiva ka mithyatva samyag mithyatva swarupasy (samyaktv swarupasy) ghatah adi gunasthanase antar asambhav hai*. It is possible that there is a liking for the truth taught by the *sarvagna*.
*Sambhavati sarvagna upadisht tatveshu ruchyanshasya api sambhavat*.
*Tada upadisht tatveshu ruchy ruchyatmako hi parinamh*. The result is liking or disliking for the truth taught. 8. 130
*Samyag mithyatvam iti*. 59. 13. There is no difference for *asangni* in relation to *nanak jiva*.
*[Ab bhaavaka kathana karte hain - mithyadristi yah ek mithyatva gunasthanavati tvana tesham sasadinan tara sambhavat*. Now, the *bhaavaka* say: *mithyadristi* is an *audayik* state because it is possible for it to be *mithyatva gunasthanavati*.
*Hota hai. Sasadan samyak dristi yah parinamik bhavah*. It happens. *Sasadan samyak dristi* is a *parinamik* state.
*[Asangniyon ka nana aur ek jiva ki apeksha antar bhavah nahin hai kyonki asanshiyon ke keval ek mithyatva gunasthan hi hota hai atah unaka sasadan adi gun sthanon se antar sambhav nahin hai]*. There is no difference for *asangni* in relation to *nana* and one living being, because *asangni* only have one *mithyatva gunasthan*, therefore, there is no possibility of a difference from their *sasadan* etc. *gunasthan*.
*Shankha ananta anubandhi krodha adi kshayake udayame*. Due to the arising of *krodha* etc. *kshaya* which are *ananta anubandhi*.
*Sasadan gunasthan prakat hota hai to ise audayik kyon nahin kahte?*. Why is it not called *audayik* when

Page #532:
---------------------------
Sarvārthasiddhi Śaṅkā-sarvagātiprakṛtiyoṃ ke udayake abhāvameṃ aur 8. 164 deśagātiprakṛtiyoṃke udayameṃ jo bhāva utpanna hotā hai use kṣāyopashamika kahate haiṃ. Kintu samyagmithyātva
mati..."9॥ Prakṛtiko deśagātipanā to saṃbhava nahīṃ haiṃ kyoṃki āgameṃ use sarvagātī kahā hai ?
67.13 Avāgdhānāt adhaḥstād bahutaraviṣayagrahaṇāt ।
Avacchinnaviṣayatvādvā rūpilakṣaṇavivivikshaviṣayauttara-aisā kahnā yukta nahīṃ hai, upacārasya samyak tvādvā । Mithyātva prakṛtiko deśagātipanā bhī saṃbhava hai. Upacāra kā nimitta hai eka deśasya samyaktvaka ghātī
68.2 Svaparamanobhiyaṃpadiśyate yathā paramanaḥsthitamarthaḥ honā. Mithyātvaprākṛtikī taraha samyagmithyātva manasā parivindyata (paricchidyata) iti । Prakṛtike dvārā samasta samyaktvārūpa aura mithyātvarūpaka ghāta saṃbhava nahīṃ hai. Sarvajñake dvārā upadiṣṭa 68.3 yadarthaḥ kevante sevāṃ kurvanti । Kasyeti cet. Tattvomeṃ rucikā bhī aṃśa rahatā hai. Sarvajñake dvārā kevalasyaiva saṃpannatattprāptipariñātadupāyasyāhadopadeṣṭa tattvomeṃ rucira aura arucirūpa pariṇāmako deśvā । Samyagmithyātva kahate haiṃ.
68.6 Sugamatvāt sukhaprāptyatvāt । ६. 148
68.7 Matiśrutapaddhatiḥ-matiśrutānuparipāṭī । Tasyā 63.11 Alpabahuttvam । Upaśamakānāmitaraguṇasthāna- vacanena śrutāyāḥ sakṛtsvarūpasaṃvedanāmātratvam paricivatabbyoḥ'alpattavāt prathamato'bhidhānam। Tatrāpi trayaḥ tattvam । Aśeṣaviśeṣataḥ punaścetasi tatsvarūpaparirūpaśamakāḥ sakṣāyatvādūpaśāntakṣāyebhyo bhedena bhāvanāmanubhūtatvam । Nirdiṣṭāḥ । Praveśena tulyasaṃkhyāḥ sarve'pyete ṣoḍaśādisaṃkhyāḥ । Trayaḥ kṣhapakāḥ saṃkhyeyaguṇā upaśamakebhyo
Bahubahuvidhā . . . . ||16॥ Dviguṇā ityevādisaṃkhyā saṃkhyāvicāre vicāritamihā
8. 195 Draṣṭavyam । Sūkṣmasāmpārāyaśuddhisaṃyatā viśeṣādhikāstattsaṃyamayuktānāmupaśamakānāmiva kṣapakāṇāmapi gra- 81.5 Apareṣāṃ nissata iti pāṭhaḥ । Tatra dviḥ sakāraṇāt । Saṃyatasaṃyatānāṃ nāstyalpabahuttvamekaguṇasthāna- nirdeśasyāyamartho mayūrasya kurasya veti svataḥ paropavartittvāt saṃyatānāmiva guṇasthānabhedāsaṃbhavāditi ।
Deśamantareṇaiva kaścit pratipadyate। Yeṣāṃ tu nisṛta iti
pāṭhastteṣāṃ 'aparaḥ' pratipattoḥ svarūpameva śabdamevāśritya [Upaśamaka upaśamaśreṇipara ārohaṇa karanevāle anya।
Viśeṣarūpatayānavadharya pratipadyata iti vyākhyā । Guṇasthānavī jīvoṃse alpa hate haiṃ isaliye unakā prathama kathana kiyā hai. Unameṃ bhī tīna upaśamakokko kṣāyasahita honeke kāraṇa upaśāntakṣāyoṃse bhinna nirdiṣṭa kiyā hai. Praveśakī apekṣā ina sabhīkī saṃkhyā
Vyañjanasya .... ||18।। Solaha ādi samāna hai । Tīna kṣapaka saṃkhyātaguṇe haiṃ, upaśamakokse dūne haiṃ ityādi saṃkhyākā saṃkhyāvicāreṃ 83.1 Vyañjanaṃ śabdādijātaṃ śabdādisaṃghātaḥ। Vicāra kiyā hai use hī yahāṃ dekha lenā cāhiye। 83.3 Antaraiṇaivakāraṃ-evakāraṃ vinā। Sūkṣmasāmpārāya saṃyamavāle viśeṣa haiṃ kyoṃki sūkṣmasāmpārāya saṃyama se yukta upaśamakokī taraha kṣapakokko 9.4 bhī grahaṇa kiyā hai. Saṃyatasaṃyatomeṃ alpabahutva nahīṃ
Na cakṣu.....॥19॥ hai kyoṃki unake eka hī guṇasthāna hotā hai, saṃyatokī taraha unameṃ guṇasthānabheda nahīṃ hai।]
84.2 Avidikkam yanmukhādiśam।

Page #533:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
1413
8. 206
8. 213
Bhavapratyay..."12211 Shruta Matipurva...||200
89.7 Prakarshaprakarshavrittiragamatha. Tathahi, Devanam 85.4 Upaaday-Ashritya.
Tavath 85.5 Paryavadaate Ksheme.
Sakkisana Padhama Dovvam Cha Sanakkumaramahimva. 6. 207
Brahmalantava Taiyam Sukkasahasraraya Chauthio.
Panchama Manadapanada Chatthio Aranacchaday Passanti. 86.2 Dravyadisamanyarpanaath-Dravyakshekalabhavarp- 
Navavejja Sattama Manutara Savvaloyam Tu || Naath.
Tatha Narakanam
Rayanppahaae Joyanamegam Ohivisao Munayavvo. 86.3. Utpreshitam-Kritam. Teshameva -Dravyadinaameva.
Pudhavido Pudhavido Gaudayaddh' Pariharejja ||
[Avadhigyaanaki Hee Aadhikta Aagamse Jaanni Chahiye. 6. 208
Jo Is Prakar Hai-Devonmen Soudharma-Aishan Swargake Dev
Pahali Prithviparayant, Sanatkumar-Mahendra Swargake Dev 86.8 Samyaktvasya-Sameechinatvasya. Gyaane Tad- 
Dusri Prithviparayant, Brahma-Brahmottara Lantava-Kapishta Pekhshatvat-Samyaktvaapekshatvat. Taduktam
Swargake Dev Teesri Prithviparayant, Shukra-Maashukra,
Shatara-Sahasrar Swargake Dev Chaturth Prithviparayant, Karanakajjavihanaa Divepayaasanaa Jugavajamme Vi.
Anata - Pranata Swargake Dev Panchvi Prithviparayant, Jugavuppannaa Pi Thaha Heuu Gaanassa Sammattam.
Aran-Achyuta Swargake Dev Chathi Prithviparayant, Navapraiwe
Yakonke Dev Satavim Prithviparayant Aur Anudish-Anu. 6. 209
Taravaasi Sarvalokko Jaante Hain. Tatha Narakonmen 86.11 Aahito Dhrito Sthapito Va. Kritasangeeti:
Ratnaprabha Prithvimen Ek Yojan Kshetra Avadhigyaanaka Kritasanketah. Ghat Ityukte Dhakara-Takara-Visarj- 
Vishay Hai. Aage Pratyek Prithvimen Aadha-Aadha Kos Niyaatmakam Shabdam Matigyaanen Pratidyate. Tato Ghat- 
Kam Karte Jaana Chahiye. Shabdat Ghatadyarth Shrutagyaanen Tasmadapi Ghatarthaajjaladharanaadikarayam. Tatha Chakshuraadavishayadhumaadeh.
Tatraapi Dhumadarshanam Matigyaanam Tasmadagnivishayam Gyaanam
Kshayopashamanimittah...."122|| Shratgyaanam. Tasmadapi Daahaadikarayagyaanam Shrutamiti. 90.2 Deshaghatispardhakaanam Kim Punah Sparadhakam Iti
Chet, Karmapudgala-Shaktinam Kramavriddih Kramahaanishcha
Sparadhakam. Shanta:-Upashantaha. Unmugdhetyadi, 87.11 Araatiyo'vantarah.
Unmugdhasya Vivekaparaad.mukhasya, Prasne Sati Aadeshi
Purushavachanam Yatha Tatravaatipatati Nabhihita'arthe Tenale 8.212
Pravartyate. Lingavat-Lanchanavat. 88.3 Vyakriyata-Vyutpadayataam.
Rupi......||27||
. 215
5.211
1. Karanakaryavidhanam Samakalam Jayamanayorapi Hi. Deepprakashayoriv Samyaktvaagyaanayo: Sughatam. -Purushartha, 34 1 2. Vidiyam"-Moolaachar 1148. 3. .."Sattami Anudish Anuttaraay Logam Tu. -Moolaachar 11491 4. Gauu Addh Parihaani. -Moolaachar, 1152.

Page #534:
---------------------------
## 414]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

There is no contradiction in the statement in 8.275 that the souls connected with the pudgala dravya are not called 'rupa' (form). Because even there, they are called so.

It is said:

119.3
"There is no change in the non-karmic (pudgala) dravya." - The generous and changing pudgalas are suitable for the three bodies, the aharasarira, the indriyasarira, the pranasarira, and the six perfections of speech, mind, and non-mind. These pudgalas are taken by one soul at one time, with the qualities of being smooth, etc., intense, slow, and medium. The explanation of their ability to give results and their nature. Because of their short duration, they are in their respective states, intense, etc., and remain, being non-karmic, experience the result, and are abandoned. Later, at some time, they are not taken as the three bodies, etc. They are the same, in the object - soul, etc., in many souls, in many forms. There is no contradiction, because of the non-transgression of perception, because of the argumentation of the dravya, because of the argumentation of the synonym of the dravya, because of the eternal nature of the special object, etc. The practice of attaining the true nature, the business of showing the nature as it is, the nayas, take, take, and abandon, in between, the previous mixed ones, and the object-one-place-grasping of the knower's intention. It is said: "Not counting the ones not taken, as long as they are infinite, then, once, in the middle, the mixed ones are abandoned, taking the ones taken. Again, the ones not taken are abandoned, taking them infinitely. Again, once, the mixed ones are abandoned, until the mixed ones are infinite, then, once, the ones taken are abandoned, taking them. By this method, by the movement of the arga, by the infinite mixed ones, taking, taking, and abandoning the ones taken, until they are infinite, then, the ones first taken, by the same smooth, etc., intense, etc., type, attain the same non-karmic state, until then, the change of the non-karmic dravya is said to be complete. That is the half-pudgala-cycle. The change of the karmic dravya is the samsara.

The karmic dravya destroys the multi-state karma. It is said that it exceeds the time of the aavali, which is more than the time of the stimulation, which is the characteristic of the unripe and ripe. The process is to be seen as before.

"The bondage is the characteristic of the knowledge, because of that, the knowledge is. Therefore, the non-arising is the characteristic of the souls." - Naigama ... 113311

"The intellect is the proof of the many forms of meaning, the part of the intellect is the meaning. The nayas are dependent on other meanings, the bad nayas are rejected because of that." - The meaning that is not abandoned is the meaning that is not produced. Because of the increasingly subtle subject matter. From the Naigama, the collection is of a small subject matter, because of the grasping of only the being, the Naigama is of a large subject matter, because of the subject matter of being and non-being. Just as there is a concept in the being, there is also a concept in the non-being. Similarly, it is to be applied here. The meaning is only a small part of the purpose.

Thus ends the first chapter.

trafacarat ... 11111

§. 276

119.13 Change of field. The infinite, limited, plant-like, ordinary body, food, breath, exhalation, death, and birth are all mixed together. The subtle, insufficient, special characteristic of the poet is for the purpose of explaining the lowest level of understanding. Because of their mutual rapid non-being and being, they are all specially characterized as the lowest level of body. Such a soul is born in the middle region of the eight lokas, in the shape of a cow's udder, below Mount Meru, making the middle region of its body the middle region. If it is said that the body of the lowest level of understanding is contrary to the eight regions, then it is not so, because the body extends to the infinite space regions. Having taken the small being, it died.

§. 253

107.10 The temporary state is obtained. It is said: "The first, the first, the first, the second, and all the times. The one that is suitable for the sky, and the one that is in the time of the Kevalis." - From the dravya, from the soul. Because of the infinite qualities of the souls with right vision who are destroying the samsara, from the souls with temporary right vision. The samsarin: " '11101

1. सर्वार्थसिद्धि is quoted 1 2. Quoted from the Ashta Shati by Akalankadeva, Ashta Shati, p. 290 1

Page #535:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
And again, by the same all-pervading body-world, the middle region is entered twice, and continuously. Not counting those arising elsewhere or there, or those arising by entering the boundary, thus three times, and four times, and so on, until the extent of the expansion, elevation, and entry is reached: the number of spaces measured by the countless parts of an angula of square expansion, for that many times, arising there, and then, by the abandonment of the previously occupied field, entering a new region, and so on, all the worlds are pervaded. Now, if it is said that this measure of the world would be that body, then no, because of the acceptance of the pervading by the abandonment of the previously pervaded space.
That
§. 277
120.5 Change of Time. First, second, etc., the ghee arises in the first, second, etc., times, until the ghee of the measure of a koti of kotis, equal to ten oceans, is completed. So also the ghee of that measure. Thus, the continuity of death is also to be known. The arising and death of the arising in succession are not counted.
§. 279
121.6 Change of State. The nature of the veil of knowledge is primary, and with reference to it, it is said. The false view, distinguished by the five senses, etc., destroys all the most wretched states, and that is called its own appropriate state. It is called a koti of kotis, equal to an ocean, a middle koti of kotis, and a koti of kotis. The places of the passions and their activities are limited by the measure of countless worlds, and are six places, which are of the form of infinite part increase, countless part increase, countless part increase, countless quality increase, countless quality increase, and infinite quality increase. Those who have fallen into them have gone through that increase and increase. By this, their decrease and increase is indicated. Those places of the passions and their activities, thus being, become appropriate for that false-view-being to dwell in. Among them, the most wretched place of the passions and their activities is extremely slow, and the place of the passions and their activities appropriate for liberation is excellent, and their nature is such that there is no difference between them in regard to the work of dwelling. That place of the passions and their activities, which makes such a state, makes various experiences of the power of giving fruit to karmas, and the characteristics of experience, and is called the cause of them. 'Joga payadipadesa dvidianubhaga kasayado

[415
kunadi' - by this statement. Therefore, that very place, endowed with special powers of wretchedness, makes countless worlds of experience and activity places. This triad, the most wretched, thus wandering about as the doer, becomes the most wretched place of yoga, appropriate for it, and conducive to it. And since the yoga, etc., are of the duration of an antarmūhūrta, etc., they take on another yoga, another passion, and sometimes, in a particular time, from the first most wretched place of yoga, they become the second place of yoga, endowed with countless part increase, which is related to their most wretched state, etc. Thus, they fall into four places. They are led by the increase of the four places, other than the infinite part, infinite quality increase, until they become countless part measured. Thus, with the most wretched experience and activity places being countless part measured in the places of yoga, the second experience and activity place of the one with the most wretched state and the place of the passions and their activities becomes. Its places of yoga also
fall into four places. They are to be known as countless part measured, as before. Thus, in the third, etc., experience places, this order is to be known until the completion of countless worlds. Thus, the second place of the passions and their activities becomes, which is attaining that very most wretched state. Its experience and activity places are also countless world measured, and each is endowed with countless part measured places of yoga, which have fallen into four places, and are to be known as before. In the said most wretched state, the excellent state, which increases in succession at each moment, is to be known as three hundred ocean-like koti of kotis measured, and the places of the passions, experience, and yoga are to be known in the order described.
§. 284
The wandering being is afraid........।।12।।
124.5 Because of being desired, because of being worthy of worship.
8. 285
124.7 Dividing in succession, transgressing in succession.
§. 286
124.10 The fourfold nature of the earth, etc., is stated in the scriptures. Thus,
Puḍavī pṛḍavīkāo puḍavīkāyā ya puḍavījīvā ya. Sāhāranopa-mukko sarīragahido bhavantarido.
-

Page #536:
---------------------------
## 416]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
8. 237
Panchendriyani......||15||
6. 331 126.4 Karmendriyanam Vakpad-pani-payupasthan- 139.12 Ashtagunaishvaryayogat Anhima • Mahima lakshananam.
Laghima-prakamya-prapti-sittva-vasitva-kamaru pitvalaks
hanat. 8. 294
Pradeshato....||381 Nirvritti......।।160
8. 335 127.5 Utsedhangulparibhasanishpannam yasya kasmin 140.12 Ko gunakaraha. Pasyopamasan khyeyabhagaha. Pramanangule panchashatani bhavanti.
Tathaha-oudarikata palyopamasanboyabhagadhi
vakriyikam tasmadapyaharakam. 6. 316
Anantgune.....||39|| Vigrahavati.....॥28॥ 135.2 Sarvotkrushtvigrahanimittanishkutkshetre sarvokkushtvigrahastrivata, tasya nimittam yannishkutkshetra 141.3 Ko gunakaro'bhyatantganaha sitata. Vakrakshetram.
Bhagaha. Atrobhayorekarthatvam yadeva bhavyananam anant
gunatvam tadeva siddhanamanantbhagatvamiti. Anena 6. 320
Jaghanyotkrushtan chanantmananam atra drashtavya. Ekam dhau......||3011
Nirupabhoga...|440 135.13 Yathechchatisargaha yatheshtpravrittiha.
6. 347 143.3 Indriyapranalikaya indriyadwarena.
Indriyalabdhau-indriyashakti. Sammurcha....॥31॥
Shubham....।।49।। 136.6 Upetya-gatva padyate-utpadyate.
6. 357 8. 324
145.9 Pratyamnayaha purabhidhanam. Sachitta......"||3211
6. 365
148.1 Charamdehasyottmavisheshanattirthankaradeho grihyate. 138.3 Tabhedaschaturashtinsahasrasankhya. Tathaha
tato'nyesham charamdehanam api -nityer anigo tasya prithivyaptejovayukaayikanam cha
gurudattapandava
dinamanagnyadina maranadarshanat. Uktabhyo'nyesham pratyek sapta sapta yonilakshani. Vanaspatikayika
vishadinapvartyamayuha uktam chanam dasha. Dvitrichaturindriyanam pratyek dve dve. Suranaraka ti rancham pratyek chatvari chatvari. Manusyanam
'visaveyanarattakhay-bhaya satthagahanasankileshehi. Chaturdasheti. Tadu ktam
aharussasaana girohao chhijjae aau.
-[Go. Karma. Ga. 57] 'nichiradhavu sattay tara dasa vilidiesu chchcheva. Sura-niraya-tiriya chauro choddasa manue sadasaha ssa. ॥' [Charam sharirake satha uttama visheshana lagane se [Varasanu. Ga. 35]
tirthan karaka sharira grahana kiya jata hai kyonki
charamshariri bhi gurudatta, pandavo aadika agni oudarik.....।।36॥
adise maran dekha gaya hai. Inse jo a tirikta
6. 322

Page #537:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[417 are destroyed by their lifespan, poison, etc. 399 is. It is said - poison, pain, blood loss, fear, weapon injury,
161.10 water, water, upper part, much suffering, and food and breath stopping
leaf-like accumulation, two-crore-thick leaf-like accumulation. Lifespan is cut off. Thus ends the second chapter.
Dvi-dhataki ... ||33|| 6. 430 169.13 Tank-cut-tirtha, Tank-cut-shore.
Bharat ... 137|| That thirty ... 120
8.437 6. 369
173.8 Is it not that the seven hells are attained by the evil deeds of the 152.7 other special features of the hell-stretches, the creation
not only in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in the self-moving ocean, etc., according to the characteristics of the world, the world-following name, in Bharat, etc., but also in

Page #538:
---------------------------
## 418]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
Those who earn karma remain in the state of **tiryanch** (animal realm), therefore there is **saudharma**... ||19||  karma-bhoomi (realm of karma). If this were not the case, then how would there be an age of **purvakoti** (previous aeon) and an immeasurable number of years in the part before it? Or, the aforementioned statement has been made with the predominance of the **manushya-kshetra** (human realm) and the **sarvamannyad** (universally accepted) **vimana-rachana** (construction of celestial chariots), **pramana** (evidence), etc., therefore there is no fault.  ||381
**Lokanuveded** (to be known from the scriptures) **Nristhiti**... ||20|| 8. 439
**Sthiti**... ||20|| 8. 439
**Vasanam** (clothing) **Vastram** (garment). 174.9 **Utsarpini** (ascending cycle) **Antyachakravarti** (last chakravarti) **Avasarpini** (descending cycle) **Gati**... 11211 **Prathamachakravarti** (first chakravarti) **Angulpramanam** (measurement of an angula). 'Two two four four two two three three twelve angula **avikavala** (without hair) **meshakesha** (sheep hair).
**Usseho** (effort). Thus ends the third chapter.
**Satt** (seven) **Chhappam** (six) **Cha** (and) **Chauro** (four) **Hatthado** (from the hand) **Avar** (below) **Honado** (from).
**Peet**... ||22|| **Uttarapadhika** (following the last syllable) **Hrasvatvam** (shortness) **Yathadrataayaah** (as in the case of **drata** (speed)) **Taparakaran** (in the case of **tapa** (heat)) **Madhyavilambitayor** (of the medium and slow) **Upasanakhyanam** (enumeration). In **Bharata** (ancient treatise on dramaturgy) it is said:
**Lakshanasutra** (defining verse) '**Drutau Vaist**' (in the case of speed). There, **drutovai** (speed) is established, **Indra**... 140
**Taparakaran** (in the case of **tapa** (heat)) is meaningless, therefore in that **lakshanasutra** (defining verse) **taparakaran** (in the case of **tapa** (heat)) 8. 449
**Madhyavilambitayor** (of the medium and slow) **Upasanakhyanasangraho** (enumeration) is present. Here also,
**Yathottarapadhika** (following the last syllable) **Hrasvatvam** (shortness) is to be seen in **Peetpadya** (yellow verse) etc. 179.9 **Arthacharo** (one who follows the meaning) **Arthachintaka** (one who thinks about the meaning). **Arakhika** (protector) **Kotapala** (guardian of a fort). **Padatya** (infantry) etc. are seven **anika** (divisions) **Hastya** (elephant) **Ashva** (horse) **Ratha** (chariot) **Pada** (infantry)
Thus ends the fourth chapter. **Tivrisha** (a type of celestial being) **Gandharva** (celestial musician) **Nartaki** (dancer) characteristics. **Utsarge** (in general) **Samaanyena** (generally). **Purva**... ||6||
**Ajiva**... ||6.463||
8. 527 88.9 **Sapteparne** (seven-leaved) **Parvani** (on each node) **Parvani** (on each node) **Sapta** (seven) **Parnani** (leaves)
202.3 **Jivalakshanabhava** (absence of the characteristics of a living being) **Mukhena** (by means of) **Jivalakshanabhava** (absence of the characteristics of a living being) **Yasyo** (whose) **Sapteparno** (seven-leaved) **Vrikshavishesha** (a particular type of tree). Similarly, **Ashtapadi** (eight-footed)
**Dwarena** (by means of the door). **Prekti** (row) **Pangkti** (row) **Ashtau** (eight) **Padani** (feet) **Yasyasau** (whose) **Ashtapadi** (eight-footed) **Dyatafalaka** (a type of celestial chariot).
**Dravyani**... ||2|| **Tatkrta** (made by that). ||140||
6. 529
202.9 **Gunasandrava** (combination of qualities) **Gunasanghata** (collection of qualities). . 469
8.530 185.6 **Kriyavisheshparicchhinna** (defined by a particular action) **Adityagamana** (movement of the sun) **Paricchhinna** (defined by). **Anyasya** (of another) **Jatyades** (of a species etc.) **Aparicchhinnasya** (undefined) 203.5 **Adyavaaparth** (for the purpose of teaching) **(Adhyaparopaṇārtha)** (for the purpose of teaching) **Samucchayārtha** (for the purpose of collection) **Kalana** (time) **Nayati** (leads) **Ananavadharitasya** (undefined) **Paricchedhetu** (cause of definition).
**Jivaasch**... ||3||
1. Pa. Mahaabha. 111191691

Page #539:
---------------------------
§. 531
204.6 Even these subtle particles, due to their inherent nature, have the qualities of being a minister and an assistant. This is because they are capable of producing effects like form, etc.
Touch, taste
112311
Form... 11511
§. 535
206.4 The alternative to this is the difference between the subtle particles of the form of the shoulder atom. Above, fire.
Space 11911
...
§. 543
2093 Just as in the previous case, there are countless regions of the dharma, etc., from the lowest to the highest, so also in the case of space, there is the concept of countless regions from the lowest to the highest.
World space. ||12|| In relation to this kind of reasoning, in relation to definitive reasoning.
...
Appendix 2
One region 111411

...
§. 557
212.10 Non-contradiction is non-obstruction, non-contradiction is non-existence.
Region ... ||16||
§. 557
214.3 Manika is Utkanika.
Motion 171
§. 559
215.1 Just as the earth element gives, so the (gives) root (?) is the base, the earth itself is the element, the earth element.
Body ··· ||19||
8. 563 The perception of the corporeal 219.5 The corporeal, by means of a thief, fear, etc., is an obstruction, a restraint. The corporeal, the ear, is also obstructed by noise, etc., resulting in deafness, etc. The corporeal, by means of unfavorable wind, is the obstruction of sound, the intended going, the turning back. The overpowering of the ear, the ability to produce the perception of sound immediately, is destroyed by the sound of a bell, etc. By means of a strong wind, the sound and its production
[419
The ability to destroy is destroyed by the sound of a drum, etc., by a mosquito, etc., by its own form
§. 570
224.2 These are the basic differences of touch, etc., each of which, in combination with two legs, etc., becomes countless, innumerable, and infinite.
...
Sound bond 11411
§. 570
224.12 The non-verbal nature of the two senses, etc., is the reason for the superior knowledge of the one sense. Thus, there is a specific knowledge of sound for those who are well-versed in sound, because it is not possible to have a sound organ. The one-sensed beings, however, have only knowledge, not superior knowledge, because they do not have a sound organ. Or, superior knowledge is pure knowledge, and it is the reason for its own nature. The one who has superior knowledge is the one who conveys meaning by means of non-verbal sound. But he who is not, is not so, just as a man on a road. It is said, "The sound that is lost is the one that has a letter." Thus, the cloud that is a whirlwind. The lotus, the drum. The city, the disease (?) The loud sound, the Kinnara. The resin, the witness
Production .. ||10||
§. 584
229.14 The word of concentration is the word of identity. The word "yuj" is taken in the sense of "yuj" and "yoga", not in the sense of "yuj" and "yoga".
That state
#11
§. 586
230.6 The remembrance that it is the same is the alternative that it is the same.
In bondage, more 17

...
8.598
235.12 The third one is the Tajivic, "In its own meaning, the third, etc., is a particle."
Time also ... ||9||

Page #540:
---------------------------
## 420]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
in!
8.602
8.626 239.11 **Purvottarabhava-prajnapananayo vyavaharanayaha**. 251.7 **Anabhoganikshepah punaranalomit रूपतयोपकरणादिस्थापनम्**. So'nant .. 1400
Tatpradosh ...100 6. 604
8.628 242.1 **Paramaniruddho buddhya avibhagabhedena bheditah**.
251.12 **Anabhivyaharatah**. **Vachanamanuchcharayathah**. Iti panchamo'dhyayah.
Du:khashok ... in 8.630 252.11 **Vaishalavyavisesho dinatvaviseshah**. Yavilant:karanasya kalushitant:karanasya. Tivanu bhayoh
atishyena paschattap:h. Kay...॥1॥
8. 630 8.610 244.7 **Audarikadisaptavidhah kayah**: Audarikii- 253.8 **Asthiyyate (Astiiryate) pratijnayyate**.  Darikamishrarvkriyikvaikriyikamishraaharakaaharakamishra- 8. 630 **Karmanalakshano**. Mishratvam cha kayasyaparipurntvam.
253.14 Na du:kham na sukhamityadi. Chikitshite hetuh:
Shastraadih, sa na du:kham sukho va du:kharup:h sukharup:h va shubh ...॥3॥
Swarupena na bhavati jadatvat. Chikitsayaam tu yuktasya 8.614
Vaidyadayiryadi krodhadirasti sada du:kham syat du:khahetu
Dharmoparjanatvat. Evam mokshasadhane hetuh upavasalo245.11 **Shubhayogasyapi jnanavaranadibandhahetu**
chaadih, sa swarupena du:kharup:h sukharup:h va na bhavati. Tvabhyupagamat. Yatha uposhitada: pathato vishramya
yastu tena yukto gurushishyaadih sa purvavat sukhadu:kharup:h taamiti vagaadiyogasya.
Veditavyah krodhadisadbhavasadbhavaabhyam. Sakashay...141
Bhoot...॥12॥ 8.616
8.632 246.7 **Iranamiirya yamah yogah iti kayaadivyaapaarah ity arthah**. Asyapi tatparyamaah **gatiritity arthah**.  
254.9 **Akshinashayah-grihaadavani vruttaabhi prayah**. Kayaadivarganalambi aatmapradeshaparispandah ity arthah.
**Avarodhah (Anurodhah)-svikarah**. **Sivan kashayaadi dvaaram anavah marg:h yasya tattadvarakam**   **Kashaya uday ...॥14॥ Karma**.
8. 636
256.6 **Atisandhan-vachanam**.
Indriya150 6.618 247.15 **Vishasanam maranam**.
8. 336
**Nivartanah**॥9॥
256.7 **Vyaparo panam vinashanam**. **Parangamaavaskanda parabhariyapaharah**.

Page #541:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[421
Bahvarambha ... ||15|| 8.638 257.1 Ajastra - Anvaratam.
6. 679 268.6 Mithyabhyakhyanam - Mithyavachanam. Vasita. Vanchita: - Hastini vanchita.
||12||
Alparambha ... ||17 6. 642 257.11 Saddhyasa ''Prapancha.
Jagat 6. 685
270.11 Duhkham Bhoj Bhoj - Duhkham Bhuktava Bhuktava.
Saragsamyama ... ||20||
Pramatta .. ||131 8. 648
8.687 258.11 Charakanirodhabandhanabaddhesha Charakena Bandhana
271.13 Avadejja - Aapatet. Kulinga: Sukshmavisheshena Nirodhabandhanabaddhesh - Gadhabandhanabaddhesh.
Jantu. Tam Jogamasejj - Padayogamasadya. Muchcha
Pariggrahottiya - M Parigraha iti. Ajjappamaanadotadviparita ... ||23||
Adhyatmapramanatah. Antya: Sankalpanatikramanetyartha. 6. 654
Tatha Hinsaapi iti. 260.4 Sambhramasadbhavopayanan Sambhrama - Adara, Sadbhavana Amayaya Up - Samipe Gamanam.
Agarya ... ||19||
8.699 Darshanavishuddhi ... 02411
*276.9 Pratiśrayārthibhi: - Griharthibhi. 8.656 260.15 Satkara: Puja. Aniguhitaviryasya Prakati
Digdesha ... ||31|| Kritsvasamarthyasya.
8.703 261.5 - Pratyuhe Vidhne.
279.10 Avahitantara karana: - Ekagramana. Shringa
Veramak. Iti Shashto'dhyayah.
Mithyopada Sha . . . 136|| 8.712 284.2 Paraakutam Parabhiprāyah.
  Kshetravastu · · · ||29।। Hinsanat " 10 8.664
8.715 264.7 Sambhinnabuddhi: Viparita mati.
285.9 Kshauma Shabhrapatolaka. Kausheyam Tasarichiram. 5.664
8.717 269.4 Sanvarparikarmtavat - Sanvarparikaratvat.
286.4 Avistabhisandhi (Adikhyabhi ") Krtaparikarma Krtaanushmanah.
Avistabhiprāyo Lobhāveshat. Yatha Manyametab
Sthitena Kenachchhavakena Kshetraparimanam Krtam Dara Hinsadi ... ||9||
(Dhara) Langhanam Maya Na Kartavyamami. Paschaduj

Page #542:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

Sarvarthasiddhi
This vessel (bhanda) brings great benefit, surpassing even speech and breath control (vagyoga) practices. Thus, the bodily activities (kayyoga) are of three types: audarika, vaikriyika, and karmana.

The pure (shuddha) eightfold (ashtaka) is marked by purity. What then is the eightfold? It is the dual (ubhaya) - abstinence from speech, body, and begging, and the opposite - improper speech, body, and begging, which establish discipline and decorum.

It is characterized by the activity of displaying the vessel (bhandimapradarshaka-karyavyapara). Elsewhere, it is ridiculous (upahsaniye) for other living beings.

Due to the digestive fire (jatharagnivashaat), the one without hands (ahasta) and without arms (abahu) - due to the delusion (mithyadarshanaagrahat), hunger-afflicted (kshudabhyaadatattvaat) - the one with passions (sakashaya) is made, by a single act (avibhagena ekakaarena).

The liquid (dravo), the invigorating (vrshya), and the intoxicating (abhishava) - the liquid is the rice porridge soaked for three watches of the night. The invigorating is that which increases the strength of the senses. The one with passions subsided (aparinada), the one with passions exhausted (ucchinṇa) - the improperly cooked (dushpakva) causes abdominal pain, so its consumption is not recommended. This is the solution.

Regarding the karmic merit (satkarmapekshaya), the one without desire (nirutsuka) and with unobstructed natural inclination (shubhaparinama-niruddhasvaram) - how can it be a transgression (atichara)? Thus.

The bodily completion (shariranirvarttiḥ) - the procedure (vidhi) of acceptance (pratigraha), etc. The eight limbs (ashtavangani) are mentioned. The pure conduct (punna) is of nine types, as stated.

The ear, nose, eye, upper and lower lips, etc. are the subsidiary limbs (upanga). The banyan tree (nyagrodha), the ant-hill (svati), the uninterrupted structure (hundasamsthanam), and the cicada (asapātikā) are mentioned.

The self-made noose (svayamkrtodvandha), the six classes of living beings (shatkaayaḥ), the four ways of death (marutpatana), and the restraint of the breath (prāṇāpātanirodhanam) are described.

Page #543:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[423
6. 755
The maximum body size of the infinite-bodied beings is one ocean, twenty-five oceans, fifty oceans, one hundred oceans 305.13.
And it should be known that the duration of existence is one thousand oceans.
As stated:
The meaning is that the sentient five-sensed complete beings have the following characteristics: they consume food, take in water and air, and have a general body.
The maximum duration of the binding of the deluding karmic matter is seventy general beings. This is the general characteristic.
However, the maximum duration of the single-sensed complete beings is one ocean, of the two-sensed complete beings is twenty-five oceans, of the three-sensed complete beings is fifty oceans, of the four-sensed complete beings is one hundred oceans, and of the non-sentient five-sensed complete beings is one thousand oceans.
The specification of the divisions:
Sixth specification.
Through the classification, the maximum duration of the knowledge-obscuring, perception-obscuring, feeling, and obstructive karmas of these beings is also known. The maximum duration of these karmas is thirty koṭākoṭi oceans. Therefore, by dividing thirty koṭākoṭi oceans by seventy, the maximum duration of the karmas of the aforementioned beings is obtained by multiplying one, twenty-five, fifty, one hundred, and one thousand.
The same duration applies to the incomplete state of these beings, where the maximum duration of the single-sensed beings is one ocean less than the asaṃkhyāta (innumerable) part of a palya, and the maximum duration of the two-sensed and other beings is proportionately less by the counted part of a palya.
It is also stated:
This is the duration of the incomplete state of the single-sensed, two-sensed, and non-sentient complete beings. The duration of the sentient incomplete beings should be known to be less by the asaṃkhyāta (innumerable) and saṃkhyāta (countable) parts of a palya.

Page #544:
---------------------------
## 424]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

The highest state of **Mohaniya Karma** for other beings and **Vikalendriya** beings should be known according to the **Purva Koti Praman** and **Ayuk** **Agam**. They bind in this way. Later they are born in **Videha** etc. The highest state of **Mohaniya** for **Ekendriya** etc. beings is one **Sagar**, twenty-five **Sagar**, fifty **Sagar**, 
...18111 **Sagar** and one thousand **Sagar**. It is special that in this state of **Mohaniya**, one should multiply by seven and divide by seven. For **Aparaptak** beings, the subtle **Samparaya**...  The remaining part of the sentence is: The said state is less than the **Palya** by an innumerable part and a countable part, as before.
**Vipaka**...1121
6. 774 **Vishtirnama**...||6||
311.12 **Matigyanavarana** by one's own mouth, **Matigyanavarana** 8.765
in the form of. By another's mouth, it is also enjoyed in the form of **Shrutagyanavarana**. 310.2 For others, as per the **Agam** - the state of the four 
8.775 **Karma Prakruti** mentioned earlier is not threefold but twofold. Therefore, **Nama** and **Gotra** should be done. The rest is as before. 312.1 **Prasankhyata** is meaningful. **A Prasankhyata** is meaningless. [That is, for the **Paraptak** **Ekendriya** being, the highest state of **Nama** and **Gotra Karma** is two parts out of seven parts of one **Sagar**.  ...||22|| For the **Paraptak** **Dwiendriya** being, 
6. 776 it is two parts out of seven parts of twenty-five **Sagar**. For the **Paraptak** **Triendriya** being, it is two parts out of seven parts of fifty **Sagar**. 312.3 **Darshan Shakti Uparodha** - **Darshan Shakti Prachhada** is the part. For the **Paraptak** **Chaturindriya** being, it is two parts out of seven parts of one hundred **Sagar**. For the **Asangyi** **Panchendriya** **Paraptak** being, it is two parts out of seven parts of one thousand **Sagar**. 
Therefore...12311
6. 778 The lowest state should be known as less than the **Palya** by an innumerable part and a countable part, as before.
312.9 **Jati Vishesh Avani** in **Sanskrit**. **Anubhavodaya Avali** stream, **Anubhavodaya Avali** three...171
flow.
6. 767
**Nama Pratyaya**-12411 310.6 For the rest, from the **Agam**, thus - for the **Asangyi**, 6. 780 the state of **Ayush** is an innumerable part of the **Palya Upam**, the **Tiryansangyi** binds **Ayush** in **Swarga** or **Naraka** for an innumerable part of the **Palya Upam**.
315.3 **Nama Pratyaya** are the cause of **Karma**. The **Pudgala** who starts **Karma** for the **Ekendriya** and **Vikalendriya** beings, according to the **Purva Koti Praman**, later **Videha**...
are done, not others.
Beings who are in the state of **Ekkshetra Avagaha** are attached, that is the meaning. They arise.
**Pancharasa** - **Madhura Rasa** includes **Lavana Rasa**. Touch... [For the **Asangyi** **Panchendriya** **Paraptak** being, how are there four touches due to the eightfold nature of **Ayuk Karma**? This is not acceptable, because **Sheetoshna Sparsha** etc. do not have co-existence with their opposites. Therefore, the **Asangyi** binds **Ayush** in **Swarga** or **Naraka** for an innumerable part of the **Palya Upam**. For the **Ekendriya**
This is the eighth chapter.

Page #545:
---------------------------
Appendix 2
[425 S Gupti ... ||2||
8.816 6. 789
330.10 Asana - sitting posture. Avasatho - house.
Mahddi - greatness. 321.6 Shirshopaharo - worship with head.
6. 819 Uttama ... ||6||
331.8 Puttika - honeybee. 6. 797 323.4 Marganartha - for investigation. Dharmopaban - for killing Dharma. 8.820 Dharmopachyartham - for the growth of Dharma.
231.11 Jatarupavat - like a born form. Jatisuvarnavat - like a gold of caste. Kunap - dead. Anitya ... 17||
8. 822 6. 799
332.4 Smitam - slight smile. 324.11 Samuditam - arisen. Abhisvangaabhavat - due to lack of attachment. Vinipato - sorrow.
8.823 8. 800
332.6 Anushitam - served. Samyamayatana - ascetic. 325.2 Vyasanopaniphate - in the fall of addiction.
6. 824 8.801
333.1 Chaturvidhopasarga - four types of offenses. Devamanavatiryagachetanakritopa.
Sarga bhedat - due to the difference of offenses. 325.14 Nirvedo - dispassion.
8.825 6. 806
333.5 Vyapgatasuvath - like a dead person. 327.8 Kramsra - by the flow of water. Tajalabhiplave - by the water entering. 8.826 Navo - boat. Nimajjate - sinks.
333.8 Mithyadarshanodrupta - excited by wrong view. Mithyadarshanoddhata - arrogant due to wrong view. 8.808
5. 827 - 328.2 Bahumadhyapradeshe - in the middle region. Atishayena - excessively. Madhyapradesha - middle region.
333.12 Vishasanam - weapon. 8.809
8. 828 328.8 Sarisrupah - reptile. Karkeendukah - crab. Duraasado - difficult to obtain. 354.2 Nissarikritamurte - of a thin body. Krishatarasareerasya - of a thin body. 8.810 329.2 Niyata - inevitable. Avashyabhavini - inevitable.
334.6 Vachanyamasya - of a silent person. Tatsamitaraya - limited.
Bhashinah - speaker. Marga ... ||8||
6. 830 8.813
'334.12 Viruddhaharasya - of opposite food. Sakrudupbhoga - one time consumption. Seva - service. Punah - again. 329.12 Tanmargparikramanaparichayen - by the knowledge of the circumambulation of that path. Jinopadista - instructed by the Jina. Punarupbhoga - again consumption. Aseva - service. Pathyaapathyaharasevanam - consumption of wholesome and unwholesome food. Vaishamyam - difference. Marganusheelasambandhen - in relation to the practice of the path.
6. 832 Kshutpipasa - hunger and thirst. 9||
335.5 Sakto - attached. Sidhma - doubt (?)
6. 829

Page #546:
---------------------------
## 426]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
6. 833
335.9 Chiroshitabrahmacharyasya chiratapasvinah. Pratyagrapuja jhatitipuja. 6. 836 336.8 Evamasamadadhanasya evamasamahitachetasah.
Sastasyadoshastadasrau mamapi iti. Sabdakulo va yatha gururnasrunoti, bahugurujanasya va. Abuddhasya va taddoshasevino va. Yasvevamalochayati iti alochanadoshah. Taduktam - Akampiya anumania jam ditthabadaram cha suham cha. Chhannam sahauliyam bahujana avvat tassevi. || Annapanaadhu parakaranasya purva parityaktasya paschat kutaschit karanat samsaktasya upadhaukitasya praptasyeti yavat. Yadvibhajanam vigatasevanam parityaag iti artha. Tadeva prayaschitta.
Ekadasa " |||10 8.841 338.2 Tatphalakarmnirharanaphalaapekshaya chintakaryakarmabhaavafalaapekshaya.
Jnanavarane ... ||13||
Jnan .."1231
6. 845
6. 864
348.4 Sabahumana -bahupujasahitam.
340.5 Kshayopashamikee shrutavishaya prajna abhyasminavadhyadyavarane sati madam janayati.
Samayik ...1181
Aacharyo ... ॥24॥ 8.866
8.854
348.12 Klishta-sharira:—piditasarirah. Sanstiyay:sanghatah.
343.9 Pramadena krto yo'narthaprabhandho hinsadyavratanushthanam tasya vilopet sarvatha parityaage samyagagamoaktavidhina pratikriya punarvataropanam chedopastapana. Chhedena divasapakshamaasadadipravrajyahapanena upastapana vrataropanam.
Uttama
||271
6. 872
Anashan .||1911
350.12 Hetvangatvadhibhiraavasya vastudharmatvasiddhih-taduktam
8.856 345.6 Ekagaraadivishayo yah sankalpah tena chittasyavarodho niyantranam. Duhkhatitiksha duhkhasahanam. Sukhanabhisvanga sukhānubandhābhāvah.
Bhavatyabhavo'pi cha vastudharmo bhavantaram bhaavavadahtasthe. Pramiyate cha vyapadishyate cha vastuvyaavasthaangamameyamannyat ||
-[Yuktyanushao 60] Nidanam ... ।।33।। 8.884
8.862 346.12 Upasanamaraadhanam. Dashadoshavjitama- lochanam. Tathahi upakaranadaidane guru manukampya alochayati, vachanena anumannya va. Yallokardashtam tadeva va, sthulameva va, sukshmameva va vyajena va. Yad-
353.1 Turiyasya-chaturthasya.
-
1. Bhagavati Arao Ga 5621
2. Yuktyanushao Shlo 60.

Page #547:
---------------------------
##  Command
113611
§. 890
354.8 After the illustration of the reason, in the absence of the illustration of the reason. Due to faith in the profound meaning - due to faith in the aggregate of objects that are beyond the reach of our understanding, especially all the particulars. They are turned away, they are turned away from the other side.
One-based *** 114111
900
358.15 By one who has attained the knowledge of the scriptures, by the end of the knowledge of the scriptures.
##  Thought
114411
Appendix 2
§. 906
358.15 The subtle nature of the substance is the substance atom. The subtle nature of the synonym is the synonym atom. Like the enthusiasm of a child who is not satisfied - like the enthusiasm of a child who is not capable. The root and the wool - with the subtle greed that is the cause of it. Unblemished - spotless. The sky - the ray. The cloud cage obstruction - the covering of the cloud layer. The ray of Dharma is the sun. The special activity of the excess of the use of the self. Special making - where there are special tools like the staff and the door. The helper of the Samayika - the Samayika, as the known conduct, is the helper of whom.
##  Pulāka
§. 910
363.6 Due to the resemblance of impure Pulāka - due to the resemblance of impure rice. Unseparated family - uncontrolled family. Both are complete - the qualities of the root and the end are complete. Like the staff line - like the staff line. Emerging - arising.
##  Self-control ... 114711
§. 912
364.5 Anuyoga - question.

8.913
364.9 The ten-part earth with unbroken letters - the ten-part earth is complete, even with letters, there are no fewer ones, so it is said.
§. 913
364.11 The eighth is the mother of the discourse, the five-committee three-secret-expounding Agam.
[427
8.914
364.12 Due to the opposition of the five root qualities and the avoidance of night meals - due to the opposition of others. Thinking that this is for the benefit of the Śrāvaka, etc. Serving one of the others, he opposes. If you ask how to oppose the avoidance of night meals, then he who feeds the student, etc., at night becomes an opponent.
§. 914
364.14 Body purification - anointing, rubbing, etc. §. 917
365.6 All six of the Bakusha-serving and the Kusīla. How are the three, from the black speck, etc., of these two? It is said that due to the possibility of attachment to the tools of these two, occasional painful meditation is possible. And with painful meditation, the three, from the black speck, etc., are possible. The four later ones of the Kṣaya-Kusīla are the pigeon speck, and by the same principle mentioned above, they should be understood, because even that one has only the attachment of the object due to the presence of the inner Kṣaya, which is only the burning.
8. 919
365.12 Those caused by Kṣaya are called those caused by Kṣaya because they are different due to the absence of the lowest level of Kṣaya. Among those, in the countless, human-limited, restrained places, the most despicable are the places of attainment - the restrained places.
Thus ends the ninth chapter.
##  From the destruction of delusion m1m
§. 9.21
367.12 Now, the conduct before the action that has not begun. Or, now, the action that has not begun - the meaning is that the action that has not begun is called a special transformation. What are they? If you ask, it is said - in one, in one time, for each living being,

Page #548:
---------------------------
## Chapter 10: 

**4281**
**Sarvarthasiddhi**

The results are limited by the number of realms recognized. There, due to the absence of specific designation, the state of being completely free from all negligence, "I am completely free from all negligence," and so on, is the same as the state of being completely free from all negligence, as described in the *Riju Sutra* and other scriptures, in the form of Samayika, in the previous time. Then, in the subsequent times, there is attainment through the five *Asamantahar* paths and the four *Parihar* paths. The specific conduct that is practiced, or the knowledge that is self-evident, is the power of the self. The *Riju Sutra* path is the only one that is *kevala* (absolute). The *Abhinava Shubha Abhisandhi* (new auspicious intention) is the *Dharmya Shukla Dhyana Jnana* (righteous white meditation knowledge), and the *Vyavahar* path is the *Matishruta Jnana* (knowledge of the scriptures) that is acquired later. The *Kshaya Ashtaka* (eight passions) and the *Ananta Anubandhi Kshaya Chatushta* (four passions with infinite consequences) are the three *Matishruta Avadhi Jnana* (knowledge of the scriptures, clairvoyance, and knowledge of the past). The *Madhyama Kshaya Ashtaka* (eight middle passions) is taken because the *Matishruta Manahparyaya Jnana* (knowledge of the scriptures, telepathy, and knowledge of the mind) has already been destroyed. Or, there is attainment through the four *Matishruta Avadhi Manahparyaya Jnana* (knowledge of the scriptures, clairvoyance, telepathy, and knowledge of the mind). Due to the division of *Badara Krisht* (the state of being bound by karma), there is a difference in the *Sthula Karma Paryaya* (gross karma). The *Upaya* (means) is the *Matishruta* (knowledge of the scriptures) that is present before and then only produced later, and the *Phal* (fruit) is the *Abhaya* (fearlessness) that is destroyed, and the remaining *Uddharit Sesha* (remaining residue) is the *Upahata Shakti* (weakened power) that is attained. This is applicable everywhere. It is said, "Karma is called *Krisht* (bound)." It is like *Dhrita Krisht* (bound by karma). It is of two types, due to the alternative to *Badara*. "The *Badara* is like a *Kitti* (bird) that is bound by the *Pachhayader* (shadow) and the *Siddh Dagati Gachvana* (attainment of the path of the liberated). It is called *Suham Kitti* (happy bird)." The *Avatari Mohaniya Bhar* (burden of delusion that is manifested) is the *Sphutit Mohaniya Bhar* (burden of delusion that is shattered). The *Aprat Vibhuti Vishesh* (unmanifested special power) is the *Achintya Vibhuti Mahatmya* (incomprehensible greatness of power).

**Ardha Chaturtha Ratna** (half-fourth jewel)

Thus, one who is sixteen years old and seven *Hasta* (cubits) tall will be the size of a half-fourth jewel at the eighth month of pregnancy. And he will have *Makti* (power). Similarly, there is also a division of time, etc. There is also a difference in the *Kalagati Linga* (time, movement, and sign). There, time is of three types: *Utsapini* (ascending), *Avasapini* (descending), and *Anutsapini Avasarpini* (non-ascending, descending). There, everywhere, the *Anyaparinamik Bhava Sattwa Vastutva Amurta Stoka* (unmanifest particles of the state of being, essence, reality, and form) are *Utsapini Siddha* (attained in the ascending time). The *Avasarpini Siddha* (attained in the descending time) are more due to their special qualities. The *Anutsapini Avasarpini Siddha* (attained in the non-ascending, descending time) are countless. Elsewhere, in comparison to the *Riju Sutra* path, there is no difference in the number of *Siddha* (liberated) at one time. In comparison to the *Riju Sutra* path, there is no difference in the number of *Siddha* (liberated) in terms of movement. In comparison to the *Vyavahar* path, there is a *Avashesha* (residue) - *Avasthiti* (state). Then, in the subsequent human movement, there is no difference in the number of *Siddha* (liberated). It is said that there is a difference in the number of *Siddha* (liberated) in the *Ekant Raga* (absolute attachment). It is said that there are *Stoka* (particles) everywhere due to previous practice. The *Sthira Yoni Antaragati Siddha* (liberated who move from one realm to another in the stationary realm), the *Manushya Yoni Antaragati Siddha* (liberated who move from one realm to another in the human realm) are countless. The *Naraka Yoni Antaragati Siddha* (liberated who move from one realm to another in the hell realm) are countless. The *Deva Yoni Antaragati Siddha* (liberated who move from one realm to another in the heaven realm) are countless. The *Hetvartha Pushkala* (purpose of the cause is abundant) is also *Heturupa* (form of the cause). In comparison to the *Riju Sutra* path, there is no difference in the number of *Siddha* (liberated) who do not know. The *Aviddha* (unbroken) ... The *Vyavahar* path is the *Sarvata Stoka* (particles everywhere), the *Napumsaka Veda Siddha* (liberated who know the knowledge of the neuter gender), the *Stri Veda Siddha* (liberated who know the knowledge of the female gender), and the *Pum Veda Siddha* (liberated who know the knowledge of the male gender) are countless. It is said, "Twenty *Navansaya Veda* (knowledge of the twenty-nine parts) and *Tho Veda* (knowledge of the three parts) become forty. The *Adadala Pum Veda* (unbroken knowledge of the male gender) are attained at one time." The *Pratyutpanna* (immediately produced) is the *Riju Sutra* (straight path). The *Bhuta Anugraha T

Page #549:
---------------------------
## Prashasti:

**A reservoir of knowledge, pure as water, a collection of gems, a sea of scriptures including the principles of conduct, the great teacher, Shri Padmanandi Prabhu.**  **From his disciple, Prabhachandra, arose a clear exposition of the essence of the Tattvartha Sutra, a work dedicated to the highest teachings.**

**May Prabhachandra, the disciple of Shri Padmanandi, a repository of many virtues, live long, devoted to the feet of his revered teacher.**

**The moon among sages, Nandi, adorned his own abode of bliss. His form, emanating nectar, brings joy to all beings.**

**Thus ends the Tattvartha Sutra commentary.**

**This work was written by me, 'En Nemiraje', residing in Venupure (Jannamoodi Vidi). It was completed on the seventh day of the Kartik month, Raktakshi Samvat.**

Page #550:
---------------------------
Appendix 3
Index of Verses Quoted in the Tattvartha Sutra
Eight Thirty-Two Dhalvas [Go. Ji. 574] Eight Hundred Thousand [Go. Ji. 628] Non-Existence Again
The Meaning is Multifaceted [Quoted from Ashta Shatika] The End is Countless
The Atom is Perceived [Bha. Aa. 562] Countless Time Cycles [Go. Ji. 562] This World and the Other World
One Twenty-Nine Piy
Cow Cow There [Mulachar 1134] The Cause and Effect of Liberation
The Path of Liberation [Panchasam 41203] The Passions Again
The Secret of the Head [Go. Ji. 387] Six Veins and Eight Joints
The Yoga of the Path [Panchasam 41513] The Arms of the Nalaya [Go. Ka. 28] Ninety-Nine Two Hundred
Consciousness is Truth [Va. Anu. 28] Three Hundred Sixty-Six [Go. Ji. 123] Three Thousand Seven
Three Two Two [Go. Ji. 533] Three Seven Wealth
That That There That [Panchasam 11189] Thirteen Crore Dese [Go. Ji. 641] Asduge Olam [Panchasam 11199]

Page
401
395
423
414
423
426
401
423
432
398
413
391
394
423
393
415
422
393
416
403
401
399
423
399
395
400
The Path of Delusion [Panchasam 11202] Ten Crore Crore
Two Two Four Four Two Two
The Shadow of the Siddha [Siddhabha. 4]
The Highest of the Highest [Vas. Shra. 224] The First First is Defined
The Fifth Ananada Panada [Mulachar 1149]
The Earth and the Earth-like
The Previous Time Period
Thirty-Two Adadals [Go. Ji. 627]
The Bond is to be Abandoned
Being and Non-Being [Yuktyanu. 60]
The Remedy for the Poison of the Mind [Panchasam 11194] The False View
The Misunderstood Knowledge
The Joy of the Path of Liberation [Mulachar 1142] The Wheel of Knowledge
The Category of the Power Group [San. Pan. San. 1145] It Was Destroyed [Bha. Pa. 29] The Twenty-Seven Ratnakhaya [Go. Ka. 57] The Vedas are False
The First of the Six [Mulachar 1148] Twenty-Seven Twenty-Eight [Go. Ji. 632] The Agreed Upon is the True [Panchasam 11205] Sixteen and Twenty-Four

Page
390
3.91
218
428
422
414
413
415
391
394
414
426
391
401
393
413
396
389
403
416
428
9413
495
410
393

Page #551:
---------------------------
Appendix 4
Quoted Verse Index
[This list provides the names of the texts from which the verses, slokas or sentences quoted in Sarvarthasiddhi, based on handwritten manuscripts, are taken, or which they have become part of.
557 574
16 186 681 164
553
693 731 529
166
687 20
277
Annonnam pavisantam [Panchatthi 7] Attadi Attamzha [Niyamasara 26] Anantarasya vidhir va bhavati pratishedo va. [Pa. Ma. Bha. p. 335, Pari. She. 5.0 380] Anudara kanya annam vai pranah abhra chandramasam pasya avayavena vigrahah samudaya samasarthah [Pa. Ma. Bha. 2, 2, 2, 24] Ashvavrishabhayoma thunechchaayam [Pa. Su. Vartika] Asidisadam kiriyanam [Go. Ka. Ga. 876] Avistalingah' shabdah na kadachilllingam vyabhicharanti indriyam pramanam uchchaladami pade [Pravachana 3, 16] Upayoga eva atma ussappini avasappini [Barah Anupekkha 27, Sudakhanda 2] Ogadhadhadhani chyo kalpyo hi vakyasesho vakyam cha vayadhinam [Pa. Ma. Bha. 1, 1, 8] Kva bhavanaste? Atmani kaakebhyo rakshyatam sapih karanasadrsam hi loke karya drishtam kariso'gnir adhyapayeti [Pa. Ma. Bha. 3, 1, 2, 26] Kshanikah sarvasanskaraah Kshatriya ayatah, Suravarma'pi guna idi davavihanam chaitanyam purushasya swarupam Joga payadi paesa [Mula 244, Panchasam. 4, 507 Go. Ka. Ga. 257] Navaduttarasattasaya [Ti. Sa. Ga. 332] Nahi tassa tanimitto [Pravachana 3, 17] Nicchidaradhatusatta ya [Mulachara 529 evam 12.63, Go. Ji.] Niddhassa ni na duraadhiena [Shatkhandagam, Go. Ji. 614]
553 841 549 819 206 569
180
19 600
2
736 465 687 324 596

Page #552:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

432
Girvaadi Jahanaadimu [Baarah Anupevakha 28]
Tadasminnastiiti
Tasy Nivaasa:
Vayaan Tappara Karane Madhyama Vilambitayorupasankaayanaam [Paa. Maa. Bha. 1. 9]
Dhanam Praanaah
Na Duhkham Na Tu
Yadvad
Na Duhkham Na Sukham Yadvadhe Tu
Naanyashaavaadino Janaah
Dhruvetyah [Jainendra 3, 8, 82]
Putthe Sunedi Saddam [Panchasangraha 1, 68] Purusha Evendham Sarvam
Udbhuta Vaakya-Soochi
Pubvasadu Parimaanam [Jambudvipaprajnaapti 13 12] Prithivyaadijaatibhinnaah Paramanaavah
Prithivyaptejovaayavah Kaathinyaadi
Prithivyaadiini Chaatvaari Bhootani
Pragruhya Pramanatah Parinativisheshaadarthaavadharanam Nayah
Pratyaasatteh Pradhaanam Baliyah
Pradeep Nirvaanakalpmaatm nirvaanam Buddhaadiviamshedikagunocchedah Purushasya Mokshah
Bandha Padi Yatt
Maradu Va Jiyadu Va Jeevo [Pravachana 17] Raagadiinam Anuppa
Logaagasapadeshe [Goo. Jee. 588, Dabvasan 22]
Haarudvaara Palla [Tilo. Pan. 1 94 Jambu. Pa. 13,36]
Vijaanaati Na Vijnana [Ti. Saa. 1, 94]
Viyojayati Chaasubhirn Cha [Siddh. Dvaa. 3. 16 ]
Visheshana - Visheshyasambandhe
Visheshanam Visheshyenetti [Jainendra 1, 3, 48 ] Sakalaadesha: Pramanaadheen Vikalaadeshi Navaadheenah
Sattaadravyatvagunatvatkarmtavadhi Tattvam Mannikarshah Pramanam
Samhi Loyakhette [Vaarah Apekkha 26]
Savva Paryaadiio [Baarah Anupekkha 29] Sadhye Vi Pogla Khal [Vaarah Gaya 25] Saadhi Kaarya Tap
Shrute
Siddhham Vidhiraarabhyaamaano Niyamaarthah
Svayamevaatmanaatmaanam


278
479
479
485
681
630
630
890
533
203
12
426
236
236
236
24
16
2
2
269
687
705
602
439
179
687
20
527
24
12
166
276
279
275
569
200, 578
687

Page #553:
---------------------------
Akashaya
Akashaya Vedaniya
Akamanirjara
Akayattva
Agar
Agarin
Agurulaghuguna
Agurulaghunamakarma
Agnikumar
Agnimaanav
Agnishikh
Agnishikha
Achakshudarshanavarana
Achitta
Achittayoni
Achyuta
A
Ajiva
AjivaKaya
Agnana
Agnana Pariṣahajaya Agnanika Mithyadarshana
Anu
Ajaghnyotkṛṣṭāsaṁkhyeya
Anuchatan
Anuvrata
Atikrama
Aticara
Atithi
Atithisambhibhaga
Atithisambhibhagavata
Atiduṣṣama
Atiprasanga
Atibhārāropaṇa
Atisandhanapriyatā
Artha
Arthādhigama
Adattādāna
Adarśana Pariṣahasahana
Adṛṣṭa
Addhāpalyā
Addhāsāgaropapam
Adharma
Adhikaraṇa
Adhigamaj Samyagdarshana
Adhoveyak
Adho'tikrama
Adholoka
Ardhanārācaṁsanhanana Ardhapudgalaparivartana
Ardhi
Adhra Vāvagraha
Anaksharātmaka
Anagara
Anangakrīḍā
Ananta
Anantaguṇavṛddhi
Anantabhāgavṛddhi
Anantaviyojaka
Anantānānta
Anantānubandhi
Anarthadanda
Anarthadandaviratī
Anugāmi (Avadhi) Anapavarṣāyuṣa
Anarpita
Anavasthita (Avadhi)
Anasana Tapa
Anākāra (Darśanopāyoga) Anākāṅkṣakriyā
Anādara
Anādisambandha
Anādeyanāma
Anābhōgakriyā Anābhōganikṣepādhikaraṇa
Anāhāraka
Anityānuprekṣā Anitthāṁlakṣaṇasaṁsthāna
Anindriya
Aniyatakāla (Samāyika) Anivṛttibādarasāṁparāya
Aniḥsṛta
Anīka
Anukampā
Anukta
Anugāmi (Avadhi)
Anugraha
Anudiś
Anudiśvimāna
Anuttaropādhikadaśa
Anuprekṣā
Anubhava
Anubhāgabandha sthāna Anubhāgādhyavāsaya sthāna
Anumata
Anutseka
Anuvīcibhāṣaṇa
Anuśreṇī

Page #554:
---------------------------
[434]
Anushreni-Gati
Anrita
Anridhi-prapta-arya
Anekant
Antakrud-dasha
Antar
Antarmuhurta
Antaraya
Annapan-nirodha
Antya
Antya-saukshmya
Antya-sthaula
Anyatva-nupreksha
Anyadristi-prasamsa
Anyadristi-samstava
Apadhyana
Aparyapti-nama
Aparaga
Aparatva
Aparā (sthiti)
Aparajita
Apavarga
Apavartya-sha
Apan
Apaya
Apaya-vitaya
Apuurva-karana
Apratipata
314
Apratyakhyana-kiya
Apratyakhyana-avaran
Apräpya-kari
Arpena..

688
435
169
210
936
871
846
710
346
572
572
802
706
Aprati-ghata
338
Apravicara
458
34
Apratmatta-samyata Apratyavekshita-nikshepa:dhikarana 626 Apratyavekshita-pramardhita-dana 721
Apratyavekshita-anma-jito-utsarga 721 Apratyavekshita-pramardhita
706
703
755
408
568
770
478
926
365
563
678
890
34
220
Samstaro-pakramna 721
618
751
204
588
Arpita
Abuddhi-purva (nirjara)
Abrahma
Abhavya
Abhavyatva
Abhasatmaka
Abhinibodha
Abhibhava
Abhimana
Abhishava
Sarvartha-siddhi
721
Abhikshna-janopayoga 635 Abhyantaro-padhi-tyaga-vyutsarga 870 Abhyarhitatva
17, 273
Amanaska
281
Amanoja
676
Amanojna-samprayoga (arta-dhyana)
877
453
453
269, 602
375 Ayatna-sadhya (karma-abhava ) 923 Ayatha-kala
364
755
897
34
Amit-gati
Amit-vahana
Amurta
Ambarisha
Ayasha: kirti-nama
Ayoga
Ayoga-kevali
Arati
587
807
693
268, 742
268
572
181
568
582
Arati-pariyha-jaya
Aratni
Arishta
Aruna
Aruna-vardvipa
Aruna-varasamudra
750
847
483
491
490
379
379
534
563
425
267
33, 936
193 396, 548
Arupa
Alata-chakra
Alaabha-parishaha-vijaya
Aleshya
Alpa-bahutva
Alpasya-avagraha
Avagaha

Avagahana
Avagraha
Avarna-vada
Avadya
Avadhi
633
679
164
Avamoudarya-tapa
855
Avasarpini 277, 417, 418,
439
533, 34
215
189
313
317
570
682
778
855
729
585
356
491
617, 18
800
804
614
755
614
614
Avasthita
Avasthita (avadhi)
Avaya
Avigraha
Aniyamati
Avinabhaavi
Avinaya
Avipakaja (nirjara)
Avirata
Avirati
Avyaya
Avyachaati
Avyabada
Avrata
Asharana-nupreksha Ashuchitva-nupreksha
Ashubha-ka-yoga
Anubhanama Ashubha-mano-yoga
Ashubha-yoga
Ashubha-vamyoga
Ashubha-bhuuti
Ashva
936
189
614
703
491
422
236, 689, 89
Ashtama-bhakta
Asat Asamikshya-dhikarana
Asai-dya
'Asadharana (bhava)
Asiddha-bhava
Asura-kumara
Asura-bhi
Asura-bhi-gandha-nama
720
745
269
265.
461
570
755

Page #555:
---------------------------
Appendix 5
[435
264
Aharaparyapti-nama Aharmarg-na
755
30
279
Asanyata Asanyama
187 Asankhyeya 544, 334,540 Asankhyeya-guna
334 Amarupayaganavaddhi Asankhya Yguna Nirjara 908 Asakhyayabhagavriddhi 279 Asangatva
931 Amangnipanchendriya 288 Asampraptamapatikasanhanan-nama
755 Astitva
269 Astinaastipravad 210 Asthir-nama
755 Ahamindra
493 Arhatpujakaranatatparata 632
Ikshuvardvipa
379 Ikshuvar Samudra
379 Itvarika
714 Itthamlakshanasanst-han 572 Indrak
473 Indriya 184, 294, 618 Indriyaparyapti-nama 755 Indriyamarg-na Indriyavishay
676
34
40
Aditya
491 Aadey-nama
755 Adya
349 Adyaanu-vrat
701 Adharadheyakalpana 549 Adharadheyabhav 549 Adhikarnik-i Kriya 618 Anat
479 Aayan
717 Anupurvya-nama
755 Apekshikasoumya 572 Apekshikasthoul-ya 572 Abhiyogya
449 Abhyantar-nirvrit-i 294 Amla (ras)
569 Amla-nama
755 Amnay -
867 Ayat 430, 572 Aayam
395 Ayu:pran
286 Ayu:sthi-ti 461 Aran
478 Aarambh
638, 646 Araatiya
211
434 Alokitapaanbhojan 668 Alochan
861 Avaran
737 Avalika 275, 604 Avasyakapar-ihani 656 Ashamsa
724 Asadan
627 Asrav
17 Asravanupreksha 805 Ahar
319 Aharak
320 Aharaksharira 330, 357 Aharaksharira-nama 755 Aharaksharira-rangopang-nama
755
Irya Ipi-th Iryapathkriya Iryasamiti Ishaan
616 616
618 668,794
478 189
m
Ukt
A Aakrandan
630 Akash - 526, 542, 43 Akinchan-ya
797 Akroshparishahasahan 826 Agam
211 Agamdravya-jiv
22 Agambhav-jiv 22 Agrayaniya
210 Ang
537 Achar
210
865 Arjav
796 Agyavijay
890 Agyavyapadik-i Kriya 618 Atap
572 Atap-nama
755 Athdhyan
773 . Atmapravad
210 Atmaraksha
449 Atmarakshit
491 A..mavadh
705 Aadan
691
Arya
194 757 658 755 286 572 761 383 418 626
Uccairgotra Uc-chadan Ucchvas-nama Ucchvas-ni:shvas-pran Utkar Utkrishta-sthi-ti Uttar-kuru Uttar-kurumanushya Uttar-gun-nirvartan Uttar-prakriti Utpad Utpad-purv Uttam Uttam-sanhanan Uday Uddhikumar Udar
Acharya
279
583 210 364 871 635 460 331

Page #556:
---------------------------
[436]
Sarvarthasiddhi
210 210
755
Angapraveshta Angabāhya Angopānganama Aṇḍa Aṇḍaja Antahkaraṇa Antahkotākoṭi Antara Antarāya Antarmuhūrta
326 326 187 258
245
Ṛtu
32
627, 738 278, 438
755
Uddhārapalya
439 Udbhāvana 659 Ūrdhvātikrama
717 Udyota
572 Udyotanāma
755 Utsargasamiti 794 Ṛjugati
320 Utsarpini 439, 418 Ṛjumatimanaḥparyaya 217 Utsedha
371 Ṛjuvimāna
479 Upakaraṇa 293, 703 Ṛjusūtra Upakaraṇasamyogādhikaraṇa 626
689 Upakāra 557 Ṛddhiprapta
435 Upagraha
557 Ṛddhipraptārya 435 Upaghāta
628 Upaghātanāma
755 Ekakṣetrāvagāha 779 Upacāravinaya 864 Ekatvavitaraka
906 Upanyāsa
249 Ekatvavitarakashukladhyāna 895 Upādhyāya 865 Ekatvānuprekṣā
802 Upāsakādhyayana 210 Ekayoga
897 Upāpada 321, 918 Ekānta
269 Upāpadakṣetra
316  _Ekāntamithyādarśana 731 Upāpadajanma
327 Ekaindriyajātināma Upabhōga 346, 703 Eranḍabīja
932 Upabhōgaparibhōgānārthakyam 719 Evambhūta
248 Upabhōgaparibhōgaparimāṇa 702, Eṣaṇāsamiti
794 703 Upabhōgāntarāya Upayōga 270, 295 Airāvatavarṣa
385 Uparimagraiveyaka 504 Aiśānakalpa
478 Upavāsa
703 Upashama 268
Ā Upashamaka
Audayika
252 Upashāntakṣāya 220 Audārakasharīra
330 Upashāntakṣāyavītarāgachhadmastha Audārikasharīranāma 755
Audārikasharīrāngopānganama Upashāntamōha 908
755 Upsarjanībhuta 588 Aupapādika
350 Upasthāpanā
861 Aupaśamikabhāva Uṣṇa
324, 570 Aupaśamikcāritra Uṣṇanāma
755 Aupaśamikasamyaktva 259 Uṣṇapariṣahasahana 818 Aupaśamikādi 924 Uṣṇayōni
324 Auṣadha
703
755
758
Kaṭukanāma Kaṭukaras
570 Kaṭhina
570 Kañcit
586 Karkashanāma
755 Karma    310, 610 Karmadravya parivartana 275 Karmanokarmabandha 572 Karmapravāda
210 Karmabhūmi
435 Karmabhūmija Mlecchha 435 Karma sthiti
440 Kārya
435 Kalpa 418, 447, 486 Kalpātīta
474 Kalpōpapannna 446, 474 Kalyāṇanāmadheyya 210 Kṣāya 264, 615,729 Kṣāyakushīla
910 Kṣāyanāma
755 Kṣāyarasa
570 Kṣāyavedaniya
257 Kṣāyādhvavāsāyastthāna 279 Kānkṣā
706 Kāpōtaleśyā
445 Kāpōtīleśyā
371
907
349
251 259

Page #557:
---------------------------
Appendix 5
[437
251
793
Krit
570
Kshayopaśāmik Kshayopaśāmikcāritra 263 Kshayogashamiabhāva 263 Kshayopaśāmiksamyaktvam 263 Kshayopaśāmikmayamāsanyama 263
191 Kṣīṇakapāya 220,908 Śrīṇakṣāyavītaraagachhadmastha 34 Kṣīṇamoha
907 Kṣīravaradvīpa Kṣīravarasamudra 379 Kṣudrabhava
276 Kṣudrahimavān
385 Kṣetra 32, 404,715, 937 Kṣetraparivartanam
276 Kṣetravṛddhi
716 Kṣetrasamsāra
276 Kṣetrārya
435 Kṣemakar
491
379
Kunjasamsthānanāma 755 Kupya
714 Kula
821 Kulaparvata Kṛpalamalā (Nirjarā) 807 Suśīla
909 Kūṭalekha Kriyā
623 Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇavarṇanāma 755 Kṛṣṇaleṇyā 371, 445 Kevala
164,920 Kevaladarśanāvaraṇa 744 Kevali-avarṇavāda 634 Kevalin 633,892 Kesarin Kotākoṭi
760 Krodha
670 Krodhapratyākhyāna 671 Kotkucya 718,719 Kandapa
719
626
392
Kāpiṣṭha
478 Kāmacāra
491 Kāmatīvābhiniveśa 714 Kārgṇakāyayogastha 286 Kārmaṇṇage 310,330 Kāmaśarīgnāma 755 Kāya
286,526 Kāyadyapti Kāyakleṇatapa
855 Kāyatva
602 Kāyaduspraṇidhāna 720 Kāyanisargādhikaraṇam Kāyabalaprāṇa
286 Kāyamārgaṇā
34 Kāyayoga 610, 897 Kāyasvabhāva
684 Kāsthiti Kāyikī Kriyā
618 Kāranaviparyāsa 237 Kārita
623 Kāruṇya
682 Kāryakāraṇabhāvasantati 341 Kāla 33, 453, 577, 601
102,936 Kālaniyam
312 Kālaparamaṇu
528 Kālaparivartanam
277 Kālavyabhicāra 246 Kālalabdhi
258 Kālasamsāra
277 Kāladi Krama
723 Kālod
379 Kinnara 453,462 Kimpuruṣa 453,462 Kilvipik
449 Kriyā 539.568, 617 Kriyāviśāla
210 Kliśyamāna
683 Kīti
402 ""Kāsaḥananāma 755
439
Khaṇḍa
572
865
Kṣapaka
908 Kṣamā
796 Kṣaya
215, 252 Kṣayopaśama
215 Kṣayopaśama Nimiṭaka-avadhi
212, 214 Kṣāyika
251 Kṣāyika Upabhōga 260 Kṣāyikajāna
260 Kṣāyikadarśana
260 Kṣāyikadāna
260 Kṣāyikabhōga
260 Kṣāyikalābha
260 Kṣāyikavīrya
260 Kṣāyikasamyaktvam 260-
Gaṅgā.
385,404 Gaṇa Gati 264,482,558,755 Gatimārgaṇā
34 Gandha
299, 570 Gandhanāma
755 Gandharva
462 Gardatōya Garbha
591,599, 606 Guṇakāra
335 Guṇasthāna
34 Guṇādhika
682
491 321
Guṇa

Page #558:
---------------------------
## 438]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
**Gupti**
6,788
847
788, 792
570 755 705
**Gurunama** **Grihastha** **Gran** **Veyaka** **Gotra** **Glan**
**Charitra** **Charitramoha** **Charitravinaya** **Charitraraya** **Chitta** **Chinta**
864 435 323 181
478
**Jna** **Jnatabhava**
619 **Jnatridharmakatha** 210 **Jnana** 6, 272, 926, 936 **Jnana Pravad**
210 **Jnana Vinaya**
864 **Jnana Varana** 737, 844 **Jnayaka Sharira** **Jnana Upayoga**
273
738 865
572
22
**Churnika** **Chulika**
572 210
**Ghan**
**Ghanavatavalaya** **Ghanangul** **Ghanodadhivalaya**
570
367 276,760
367
**Chhamastha**
273 **Chhadyasthavitaraag** 839 **Chhaya**
711, 861 **Chhedopasthapanacharitra** 853
572
**Ghritavardvipa**
379 398
**Ghritavarasamudra**
**Ghrana**
288
367
298
744
**Tap**
288 433 701 422
572
**Tat**
572 **Tattva**
10, 20 **Tattvartha**
9, 10 **Tattvadhigam**
23 **Tathagataparinam**
931 **Tadvyatiriktajiva** _22 **Tadaahrutadan**
712 **Tadupay** (Prayaschitta) 862 **Tanuvatavalaya** **Tanmanoharangnirishantyag**
674
656,796 **Tapah Prayaschitta**
861 **Tapasvin**
86 **Tamas**
572 **Tamah Prabha**
366 **Taap**
630 **Tikta**
570 **Tiktanam**
755 **Tiginchha**
392 **Tiryagatikram**
717 **Tiryagati**
755 **Tiryagyon**
495 **Tiryagyonij**
441 **Tiryaglok**
471 **Tirtha**
915 **Tirthankara** **Tirthankaratvanam** 755
453
**Chakshus** **Chakshusdarshanavaran** **Chakshuspran** **Chatunikaya** **Chaturtha-Anuvrata** **Chaturyabhakta** **Chaturasra** **Chaturasradi** **Chaturindriya** **Chaturindriyajatinam** **Chandraabha** **Chamar** **Charam** **Charmadeha** **Charamottamadeha** **Charyaparisahasahana** **Chakshus** **Chap**
**Jagatsvabhava**
685 **Jadhanyaguna**
592 **Janma**
324 **Jambuadvipa** 378,379 **Jambuvriksha** 383, 430 **Jayanta**
478 **Jarayu**
325 **Jarayuj**
3212 **Jalkant** **Jalaprabha**
453
755 **Jatyarya**
435 **Jin**
840, 841 **Jiva** 17, 296, 734 **Jivatva**
267 **Jivasamaas**
34 **Jivaadhikaran** 623 **Jivit**
56: **Jivitaashansa**
724 **Jugupsa**
750
**Jati**
381 288 565 191 453 365 365 364 423 579 422

Page #559:
---------------------------
Appendix 5
[439
492, 493
493 701
701
288
Dvicarama Dvicarama-dehatva Dvitiya-anuvrata Dvindriya Dvindriya-jati-nama Dvipa Dvipa-kumara Yanuka
755
Deva
Tivra-bhava
619 Tusita
491 Trnasparsa-parisah-vijaya 831 Tritiya-anuvrata Tejas-sarira-nama Tairyag-yonayu
753 Torana-dvara
409 Tyaga
655,797 Tras
701, 754 Tras-nama
755 Tyastra
572 Trayastrisa
449 Triyoga
898 Sri-indriya Sri-indriya-jati-nama
754 378 460
545
676
Duh-pra-mrsta-nikshepa-adhikaran 626 Duspama
418 Dusshama-sushama
418 Duh-svara-nama
755 Drsta-vada
210
442, 633 Devagati
755 Deva-ati-prayoga-anupurvya-nama 755 Deva-shi
491 Deva-varna-vada
634 Devi
402
370,371 Desa
666,702 Desa-niyama
312 Desa-pratyaksha
212 Desa-virata
885 Desa Virati Desa-ghati-spardhaka
263 Deva-kuravaka
422 Daiva-ayu
752 Dansha-mashaka-parisah-kshama 819 Dhuti
480 Dravya 21, 241, 528, 581
Deha
288 751
M
702
873
34
Dhana
714 Dhanush
422 Dharana
453 Dharma 526, 633, 788 Dharma-svakhyata-tva-anupreksha 810 Dhartha-dhyana Dharma-varna-vada
634 Dharma-astikaya 561, 934 Dharma-upadesha
867 Dhanya
714 Dharana
189, 196 Ghataki-khanda 379, 430 Ghataki-vriksha
430 Dhyana
857, 871 Dhuma-prabha
366 Dhriti
402 Dhruva
192 Dhruva-avgraha
196 Dhrauvya
583
Dasha-vakalik
211 Darshan 6, 190, 273, 926 Darshan-kriya
618 Darshan-margana Darshan-moha
846 Darshan-moha-kshapka 907 Darshan-vinaya
864 Darshan-vishuddhi
655 Darshan-arya
435 Darshan-avaran
737 Darshan-upayoga
273 Datri-vishesha
727 Dana
632, 726 Dana-antaraya
758 Dasa
714 Dasi
714 Dik-kumara
460 Dig-antara-kshiti
493 Dig-virati
702 Disha
531 Duh-kha 564, 629, 680 Dur-bhag-nama
755 Duspakva
599 924
563
Dravya-karma Dravya-jiva
22 Dravya-tva
529 Dravya-paramanu
906 Dravya-parivartana
275 Dravya-man 282, 531, 563 Dravya-vaka Dravya-vishesha
727 Dravya-liga 363, 916 Dravya-leshya
265 Dravya-sanvara
785 Dravya-athikana-ya Dravya-ashraya
605 Dravya-indriya
292 Dviguna Dviguna-dviguna
413
410
Nadi Nandi-shvara-dvipa Nandi-shvara-samudra Napumsaka Napumsaka-veda Naya Naraka Naraka-gati-nama
379
379 358, 363
750 24, 240
369 753
410
721

Page #560:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**440]**
Narakagatiprayogyanupojyanama
Narakprastar
Nagakumaramyapariṣaha nama (karma)
Namajīva
Namanikṣepa
Namapratyaya
Naraka
Narakabhāva
Narakāpu
Nārācasamhanananama
Nikāya
Nikṣepa
Nigodrajīva
Nirguṇa
Nirgrantha
Nirjarā
Nirjarānuprekṣā
625
555
605
909
17, 777, 790
807
371, 585
269 697, 723
883
657
743
743
25
223
755
Nirmāṇaraja:
491
Niyatakāla (Samāyika) 854
Nirapavāda
706
343
347
625
Nitya
Nityatva
Nidāna
Nidāna (Dhyāna)
Nindā
Nidrā
Nidrānidrā
Nirdeśa
Nibandha
Nirmāṇa
Niravaśeṣa
Nirupobhoga
Nirvartana
Nirvartanaadhikaran
Nirvṛti
Niḥśīlatā
Niḥśrīsavrata
755
369
460
820
738
22
22
779
359, 368
265
752
755
442

626
293
640
645
Nisarga
Nisarga kriyā
Niḥsr̥ta
Niḥsr̥tāvagraha
Niṣedha
Nidrava
Nīcagatra
Nipadyāpariṣahavijaya
Niṣkuṭakṣetra
Niṣkriya
Nību ti
Nīla
Nīlavarṇanama
Nīlaleśyā
Nṛloka
Naigamanaya
Sarvārthasiddhi
Naisagika (Mithyādarśana)
Naisagika (Samyagdarsana)
Nyāsāpahāra
Noāgamadravya jīva
Noāgamabhāva jīva
Noāgamabhāvi jīva
Nokarmadravya parivartana nokṣāyavedanīya
Nyagrodhaparimaṇḍalasamsthāna
Padma
PadYaleśyā
625
618
194
193
386
824
716
539
627
757
659
386,570
755
271, 445
470
240
731
15
22
22
22
275
257
Paprabhā
Pañcama (Aṇuvrata) Pañcendriyajātināma
Para
Paraghātanāma
Paratva
Parapratyaya utpāda
Paramārthakāla
Paravivāhakarana
Paravyapadesa
Nāma 755
711
266
701
755
392
485
333
755
568
539
568
713
723

Parā (Sthiti)
Parā (Pramāṇa)
Parikarman
Parivāha
Pariṇāma
Paribhoga
Parimandala
Parivartana
Parivārap
Pariṣad
Pariṣatk
275
403
403
403
Parivāha
788
861
Parihāra (Prāyaścitta) Parihāravishuddhicāritra 853
545
812
Parītānanśa
Pariṣaha
Parokṣa
Paropakāra
Paropadeshanimittak
210
883, 638, 695
371, 607
703
572
Paly
Palyopam
Pāpa
Pāpa (Bandha) Pāpopadeśa
Pārigrahita kiyā
Pāriṇāmika
Pāriṇāmikabhāva
Pāritāpikī kriyā
Pāriṣad
Pīta
760
24
(Mithyā°) 731
672
Paroparodhākarana Paryāptināma
755
Paryāya 241, 599, 606 Paryāyādhikanaya
24 438
325, 422
614, 783
781
703
618
251, 597
266
618
449
570
484
444
816
462
392
Pītaleśyā
Pītā (Leśyā)
Pipāsāsaḥana
Piśāca
Puṇḍarīka
174
726

Page #561:
---------------------------
**Punyakarma** (Bond)
**Pudgala** (Matter)
**Pudgalakshepa** (Throwing of Matter)
**Pudgalaskandha** (Matter-Body)
**Puman** (Soul)
**Purushavyabhichar** (Sexual Misconduct)
**Pulaka** (Gooseflesh)
**Pushkara** (Lotus)
**Pushkaravaradvipa** (Lotus-Island)
**Pushkaravar Samudra** (Lotus-Ocean)
**Pushpaprakirnak** (Scattering of Flowers)
**Punveda** (Knowledge of Merit)
**Purna** (Complete)
**Purnabhadra** (Completely Auspicious)
**Purva** (Previous)
**Purvakoti** (Previous Limit)
**Purvagata** (Previous State)
**Purvaga** (Previous Birth)
**Purvaprayoga** (Previous Action)
**Prithvi** (Earth)
**Prithvikaaya** (Earth-Body)
**Prithvi Kayik** (Earthly)
**Prithvijeeva** (Earth-Being)
**Pot** (Vessel)
**Prakirnak** (Scattered)
**Prakriti** (Nature)
**Prakritibandhavikalapa** (Alternative to Nature-Bond)
**Prachala** (Flow)
**Prachalaprachala** (Flowing Flow)
**Prachchhana** (Concealment)
**Prashaparishhajay** (Victory over Anger)
**Pratar** (Morning)
**Pratikramana** (Self-Reflection)
**Prati shat** (Rejection)
**Pratipat** (Understanding)
**Pratirupa** (Image)
**Pratirupaka Vyavahar** (Conduct of Image)
**Prati shray** (Refuge)
**Pratisevna** (Service)
**Pratisevnakushila** (Skillful in Service)
**Parishista 5** (Appendix 5)
**Prati ghat** (Obstruction)
**Prathamasamyaktva** (First Right Faith)
**Prathamanuyoga** (First Anga)
**Pradesh** (Region)
**Pradeshprachay** (Expansion of Region)
**Pradeshbandha** (Bond of Region)
**Pradeshavattva** (Having a Region)
**Pradesh sansthanavishkambha** (Expansion of the Region's Structure)
**Pradosha** (Twilight)
**Prabhanjana** (Destruction)
**Pramatta** (Negligent)
**Pramattasanyata** (Controlled Negligence)
**Pramarjita** (Purified)
**Pramana** (Proof)
**Pramanani rmana** (Creation of Proof)
**Pramanaphala** (Fruit of Proof)
**Pramanangula** (Measure of Proof)
**Pramada** (Negligence)
**Pramadacharita** (Conduct of Negligence)
**Pramoda** (Joy)
**Pratyaksha** (Direct Perception)
**Pratyabhijnana** (Recognition)
**Pratyavekshana** (Observation)
**Pratyakhyanapuurva** (Previous Rejection)
**Pratyakhyamavarana** (Covering of Rejection)
**Pratyekabuddhabodhita** (Enlightened by Each Buddha)
**Pratyekashari ranam** (Name of Each Body)
**Prayogakriya** (Action of Experiment)
**Pran** (Life)
**Pranat** (Life-Force)
**Pravachanavatsalatva** (Love of Sermons)
**Pravadin** (Speaker)
**Pravichar** (Reflection)
**Prashansa** (Praise)
**Prashnavyakarana** (Grammar of Questions)
**Pranavyaparo pana** (Transfer of Life)
**Pranatipataki kriya** (Action of Violence to Life)
**Pranapanaparyapti nam** (Name of the Fulfillment of In-Breath and Out-Breath)
**Pranavaya** (For the Sake of Life)
**Pratyayiki kriya** (Action of Belief)
**Pradoshiki kriya** (Action of Twilight)
**Prapyakari** (One Who Achieves)
**Prayashchitta tap** (Penance)
**Prayogik** (Experimental)
**Prayogik bandha** (Experimental Bond)
**Prayogiki** (Experimental)
**Preshyaprayoga** (Experiment of Sending)
**Proshadha** (Medicine)
**Proshadhopavasa** (Fasting on Medicine)
**Proshadhopavasavrata** (Vow of Fasting on Medicine)
**Bandha** (Bond)
**B**
**Bah** (Many)
**Bahuvitha** (Many Kinds)
**Badar** (Name of a Hell)
**Badarnam** (Name of a Hell)
**Badarsamparaya** (Association with Hell)
**Bal tap** (Penance for Children)
**Bahyanivriti** (External Restraint)
**Bahyo padhityagavyutsarga** (Abandonment of External Obstacles)
**Bandhachheda** (Breaking of Bond)
**Bandhannam** (Name of Bond)
**Bandhapadartha** (Object of Bond)
**Buddhi** (Intellect)
**Bodhidurlabhanupreksha** (Contemplation on the Difficulty of Enlightenment)
**Brahma** (Brahman)
**Brahmacharya** (Celibacy)
**Brahmalokalaya** (Abode of the Brahma World)
**Brahma** (Brahma)
**Brahmottara** (Higher than Brahma)
**Bhakti** (Devotion)
**Bha** (Being)
**Bhaktapanasan yogadhikaran** (Chapter on the Association of Food and Drink)
**656**

Page #562:
---------------------------
## 442]
747
385
427
460
278
212
440
568
253, 268, 742
268, 924
34
Bhaav
21, 32
Bhaavakarma
924
Bhaavjeev
Bhaavana
22 664, 673 906 Bhaavaman 282, 531, 563
Bhaavparamanu
Bhaavaling
Bhaavalelya
Bhay
Bharatavarsh
Bharatvishkambh
Bhavanvaasi
Bhavparivartan
Bhavpratyaya-avdhi
Bhav sthiti
Bhavishyat
Bhavya
Bhavya-tv
Bhavya-margana
Bhaavvaaku
Bhaavsanvar
Bhaavsansar
Bhaavaagar
Bhasha-paryapti-naam
Bhasha-lakshan
Bhasha-samiti
Bhiksha
Bheem
Bhirutva-pratyakhyan
Bhoot
Bhootanand
Bhoomi
Bhed
Bheda-abhed-viparayaas
Shuddhi Bhog-bhoomi Bhog-antaraya
Mati

363, 916
264
M
563
785
279
699
755
572
670
462, 568, 631
453
366
572, 575
236
672
437
794
703
453
759
163, 181
Madhur
Madhur-naam
Madhyagraiveyak
Madhya-pradesh
Man
Man:paryaya Manah paryapti-naam
Manah-praveechaar
Mand-bhaav
Manushya-gati
Sarvarth-siddhi
Manogupti
Manoj
Manushya-gati-prayoga-anupurvya-naam
Manoyog Dushpranidhan Manobal-pran
Manoyog
Manonisarga-adhikaran
Maran
Maranasha
Marud
Mal-peeda-sahan
Mahakaay
Mahakaal
Mahaghoosh
Mahatamah Prabha
Mahapadmini
Maha-pundarik
Mahapurash
Maha-bheem
Mahamaandar
Mahavrat
Mahashukra
Mahaskandhra
Mahi-himalayan
Kale
Mahendra
Mahorag
Naatmay Margana-sthan
570
755
505
541
563
164, 216
755
456
619
755
755
669, 793
676, 865
719
288
610
626
565 705
724
492
832
453
452
453
367
392
392
453
453
479
666
478
572
385
435
479
462
628, 723 34

Maatra Bhaavana
Manibhadra
Maardav
Manushyothar-shel
Maaya
Maaya-kriya
Maranan-ki
Maheindrakalp
Mitra-anuraag
Mithun
Mithya-tv
Mithya-tv kiya
Mithya-darshan
Gidhya-darshan-kriya
Mishya-vrushti Bhisyo-upadesh
Mishra (Bhaav)
Mishra (Yoni)
Mukt
Mukhya-kaal
Moorcheha
Moort
Moorti
Moorti-mattv
Mool-gun Nirvartan
Mool-prakriti
Mridhu-naam
Meru
Meru-choolika
Mesnaabhi
Maitri
Maid
Moksh
Moksh-marg Moksh-hetu Mohaniya
Maurya
656
453
644, 796
434
639, 697
Y
6,18
705
479
723
693
749
618
697, 729
618 34,786
711
252
324
274,280
603
694
269
535
564
626
279
755
382
479.
383
382
692
1, 8, 17, 922
4, 8 19 737 719
Yaksh
462
Yatna-sadhya (Karma-bhaav) 923

Page #563:
---------------------------
Appendix 5
[443
364
Vasus
584
Lakshana Lakshmi Lakshya
402 584 584
Laghu
Yasha:kala Yathakyatacharitra 853 Yasha:kirtinam
754 Yachana Parishahasahana 828 Yuktananta
545 Yoga 310, 632, 729 Yogadushpranidhana
719 Yoginigraha
792 Yogamargana
34 Yogavakrata
651 Yogavisesha
779 Yogasthan
279 Yogipratyaksha
178 Yojana
394 324
460
755
Yoni
Lakshyalakshanabhava
570 Laghanam
755 Labdhi
253,295 Labdhipratyaya
252 Lavanoada
378 Lantava
478, 479 Labhantaraya
759 Linga 264,363,916,936 Lingavyabhichara
243 Leshya 34,265,266,445
481,917 Leshyavishuddhi
480 Loka
276, 545 Lokakshetra
276 Lokapala Lokapurana (Samudghata) 541 Loka Bindumara
210 Lokakash 541,548 Lokanupreksha
808 Lokanuyoga 369,479 Lobhpratyakhyana Lohita Laukantika
488
755
Raktavarna nama Rakta Raktoda Ratnapraba
Vashishta
453
491 Vakpran
288 Vaggupti 668,793 Vagdushpranidhana 719 Vagnisargadhikaran 626 Vagyoga
610 Vachana
867 Vatakumar Vapi
405 Vamanasanthananama Varunivaradvipa 379 Varunivarasaamudra 379 Valukaprabha
366 Vastu
714 Vikaladesha
24 Vikriya
331 Vigraha
310,314 Vigrahagati
309 Vighna Vichikitsa
706 Vijay
478 Vijayardha Vitarka
903
572 Vidaran Kriya
618 Videha Videhajana Vidyana Pravada
210 Vidyadhara
434 Vidyutkumar
460 Vidhana (Anuyogadvara) 26 Vidhi
727 Vidhivisesha Vinaya (Tapa)
857 Vinayasampannata 655 Viparyaya
233 Viparita (Mithyadarshana) 731 Vipaka
773 Vipakaja (Nirjara) 778
385 385 369 750
662
449
Rati
385
385
Vitata
425
Ramyakavarsha Rasa Rasana (Indriya) Rasanama Rasanaprana Rasaparitayaga Raho'bhyakhyana Rakshasa Raga Ruvimana
670 570
418
299,569
298 755 288 855 711 462 676
385 570, 589
755 535 456
728
Rukhsanama Rupa Rupapravichara Rupanupata Rupin Rogaparishahasahana Raudra dhyana
Vakusha
909 Vajanaraachansahannana nama 755 Varna
299, 570 Varna nama
755 Vartana
568 Vadha
630, 710 Vadhaparipksha ma 827 Vanaspati
303 Vahni
490 Val Yavritta
717
535
830
873
434

Page #564:
---------------------------
## 444]
**Sarvarthasiddhi**
216
825
473
478
324
453
572 572
588
**Vedana** **Artadhyana** 882 **Vedaniya** 737, 849 **Vedamargna**
34 **Vaikriyika Sharira** 330 **Vaikriyika Sharira Nama** 755 **Vaikriyika Sharira Angopanga**
**Nama** 755 **Vaijayanta** **Vainayika** (Mithyadarshana) 731 **Vaimanika**
"473 **Vaiyavrttya** 632, 656 **Vaiyavrttya Tap**
857 **Vairagya**
684 **Vairochan** **Vailamb**
453 **Vaisesika** **Vaisesika Bandha** **Vaisesiki**
568 **Vyanjanavagraha** **Vyantara**
462 **Vyapgatalepa Lambhu** **Vyaya**
583 **Vyavahara**
245 **Vyavahara Kala** 568, 603 **Vyavahara Palya**
439 **Vyakhya Prajnapti**
210 **Vyaghata**
356
861 **Vyutsarga Tap**
857 **Vyuparat Kriya Niti** 895 **Vryshestarasatyaga** 674
663,708 **Vratin**
632
199
**Vipaka Vichaya**
890 **Vipaka Sutra**
210 **Vipulamati Manahparyaya** **Vibhangajnana**
239 **Bimana** **Vimochita Avas** 672 **Virat**
907 **Virata Avirat**
703 **Virati**
663 **Viruddha Rajya Atikrama** 712 **Vivikta Shayya Asana Tap** 855 **Vikrit** **Vivritayoni**
324 **Viveka**
861 **Vishuddhi** 219, 221 **Vishesha**
588, 624 **Vishesha Arpana** **Vishreni Gati**
314 **Vishva**
491 **Vishaya Nibandha**
225 **Vishaya Samrakshana Smriti Samanvahar**
887-88 **Vishkambha**
380 **Visarpa**
557 **Visavadana**
652 **Vihayoga Gati Nama** **Vichar**
905 **Vitraga Samyaktva** **Vipsa**
624 **Virya**
620 **Virya Antaray**
758 **Virya Anupravaad**
210 **Vatt**
572 **Vrtti Parisankhyana** 855 **Vrdhi**
417 **Vrushabhesht**
491 **Venudev** **Venu Dhari**
453 **Ved**
362 **Vedana**
371
**Shukra**
**Shabdnaya**
246 **Shabda Pravichar**
456 **Shabda Anupat**
717 **Shayya Parisha Hakshama** **Sharkara Prabha**
366 **Sharira**
482, 562 **Sharira Nama**
755 **Sharira Paryapti Nama**
755 **Sharirothshedha**
418 **Shalya**
696 **Shikharin**
386 **Sheet**
570 **Sheet Nama**
755 **Sheetayoni**
324 **Sheet Vedana Sahana**
817 **Sheel**
706,708 **Sheel Vateshu Anatichar Bhavana**
655
478, 479 **Shukla**
570 **Shukla Dhyana**
573 **Shukleshya** 55, 485 **Shuklavarna Nama** 755 **Shubha Nama**
755 **Shunyaagara Avas**
672 **Shaksh**
865 **Shok**
629, 750 **Shouch**
632,796 **Shravak**
701, 907
402 **Shruta** 164,205,301,
633,911 **Shruta Kevalin** **Shruta Jnana** 207,302 **Shruta Jnana**
239 **Shruta Avarna Vaad** **Shreni** **Shreni Badha**
473 **Shreyaskara**
491 **Shrotra**
932
755
12
**Vyutsarga**
211
**Shanka**
264
453
**Shat**
634 312
**Shat Sahasra** **Shatar**
283 283 478 299
**Shabda**
298

Page #565:
---------------------------
## Shrotrapraan

288
279
Shatsthana Patit Shathbhakt
34
422
555
34
618
656
721
Sakaladesh
24 Ka Kshaya 615,733 Sakriyatva
602 Sachitt
323 Sachitt (Yoni) 324 Sachittnikshep
722 Sachittapiphaan 723 Sat 32, 235, 581, 389 Satkar-Puraskar Parishah
Sahan 833 Sattwa
682 Satpurush
453 Saty
796 Satyapravad
210 Satyabha
491 Sadupasham
463 Sadash
594 Sadvedya
745 Sadharmaavisanvad Sanatkumar Sannikarsh
165 Sapratighat (Sharira) 555 Samachaturasrasansthananaan 755 Samanaska 281, 307 Samantanupaatkriya 618 Samabhirudha
247 Samay
275 Samavay
210 Sambandha
721 Sambhinnabuddhi
664 Samyak Charitra Samyaktwa 649,926 Samyaktwakriya
618
Parisisht 5 Samyaktwaprakriti 479 Samyaktwa-Adhikarana 28 Samyaktwa-Nirdhesh Samyaktwa Margana Samyaktwa Nidhaan 31 Samyaktwa Sadhan
28 Samyaktwa Sthiti 30 Samyaktwa Swamitwa 25 Samyaggyaan Samyagdarshan 4, 9, 10, 26 Samyagdristi 749,907 Samyang Mithyatwa 749 Samyang Mithyadristi Samparay
616 Samadaan Kriya Samadhi Samarabha
624 Samiti
488 Sammishra Samuccchinnkriyaanivati 906 Samudra
378 Sammurchhan
321 Sammurchhanjanma
329 Sammurchhin
358 Sayogkevali
34 Sarag
632 Saragsamyaktwa 12 Sarag Sanayam 632, 647 Sarit
404 Sallekhana
705 Sarva
666 Sarvagya
211,569 Sarvaghatispardhak 263, 304 Sarvapratyaksh
212 Sarvarakshit
491 'Sarvarth Siddhi
478 Sahasanikshepaadhikarana 627 Sahasra
382 Sahasrar
478 Sakar
273
[445 Sakaramantra Bhed 711 Sagaropama 258,439 Sagaropamakotikoti 418 Sadisambandha
341 Sadhan
25 Sadhanvyabhichar 246 Sadharanbhav
269 Sadharan Sharira Sadharanshariranam 755 Sadhu
865 Sadhya
937 Sanatkumar
478 Sapavad
706 Samaan
588 Saamanik 402, 449 Samaansanjna
527 Samaanyarpana 588 Samaayik (Shikshavrata) Samaayikcharitra 854 Samaayikvrata
702 Samparayik
616 Saamy
594 Saraswat
490 Saasadan Samyagdristi 34 Siddhatwa
926 Sindhu
385, 404
480, 564 Sughoosh
453 624
479 Suparna Kumar
460 Shubhaganam
755
570 Surabhigandhanam 755
714 Sushama
418 Sushamasushama
418 Suswaranam
555 Sukshma Kriyapratipaati 895,906
672
479
Sukha
Sujanta
Sudharma
Surabhi
Suvarna
755
Sukshma

Page #566:
---------------------------
446]
Sarvarthasiddhi
755
297
210
Sva
Sarambha
624 Samvara
17,784,792 Samvaranupreksha
806 Samvrita
323 Samvritayoni
325 Samvega
655,684 Sanshaya (Mithyadarshana) 731 Samsara Samsarin
274 Samsara-hetu Samsaranupreksha
801 Sanstava
707 Sansthananama
755 Samhara
556
801
19
Steya
452
385
418
Sparshana (Indriya) Sparshanakriya
618 Sparshananama
755 Sparshanendriyaprana 286 Sparshapravichara
456 Sthira
755
726 Svatattva
251 Swayambhuramanasamudra
379 Swarupaviparaya 236 Swatisansthananama 755 Swarthapraman
24 Swamitva
25 Sankara
600 Sanklishtaasura
374 Sankhya
32,936 Sankhyavyabhichara 240 Sankhyeya
544 Sankhyeya Gunavriddhi
279 Sankhyeyabhagavriddhi 279 Sangrahanaya
243 Sangha
633,865 Sanghata
576 Sanghatananama Sanghavarnवाद
634 Sanjvalana
751 Sanjna
181,308 Sanjnitva
308 Sanjipanchendriya
288 Sanjnin
308 Sansthana
572 Sansthanavichaya
890 Sanyata
632 Sanyatasanyata 34, 632 Sanyama 632,796,911 Sanyamamarganga
34 Sanyamasanyama 932, 647 Sanyoga 589, 625
Sukshmanama Sukshma Nigodajiva 276 Sukshmasamparaya 34,838 Sukshmasamparaya Charitra 853 Sukshmaikkshetravagaha 799
210 Sutrakrita ( Anga) Suryabha
491 Saukshmya
572 Soudharma
478 Saushira
572 Skandha
545, 573 Stanitakumar 460 Styanagaddhi
743 Stenaprayoga
712
690 Steyasmatisamanvahar 888 Stri
363 Striparisahasahana 822 Stree sangakatha shravanatyaga 674 Streeveda
750 Sthana
210,919 Sthananirmana
755 Sthapana
21 Sthapanajiva
22 Sthavara
384 Sthavarananama
755 Sthati 25,366-77,480,
558,736 Sthitibandha विकल्प 760 Staulya Snigdha
570 Snigdhananama
755
181 Smrtyanupasthana
720 Smrtyantaradhana
716
299, 567 Sparshana (Anuyogadvara) 32
252
755
Harikanta Harivarsha Harivarshamanushya Harisingha Haridravarnanama Harivarshaka Hasya pratyakhyana Hiranya Hinsa Hinsa pradan Hinsa smritisamanvahar Heenaadhikamanonman Hiyaman Avadhi Hundasansthana Hundasansthananama Haimavataka Haimavataka manushya Haimavatavarsha Hairanyavatavarsha
755 421 670 714 687 703 888 712 215 371 755 421 418
572
385
Smriti
385 382 417 402
Sparsha
Hrasa Hri

Page #567:
---------------------------
Siddhāntācārya Paṇḍit Phūlchandr Śāstrī (1601-1962) was a renowned scholar in the field of Jain philosophy and principles, known for his multifaceted knowledge. He was deeply involved in contemplation, literary pursuits, and played a significant role in national and social upliftment movements. He even faced imprisonment during the Quit India Movement. Paṇḍitjī was a discerning interpreter of the essence of the Āgamas. He fearlessly led the movement to revive the fading brilliance of Jain philosophy, rooted in the principle of non-violence, and to unveil its benevolent public form for decades. Born in Silāvan, a small village near Lalitpur (U.P.), Paṇḍitjī influenced a long lineage of disciples through his successful teaching roles in various institutions. He was also associated with the Hindu University, Varanasi, as a religious teacher. He captivated the scholarly world with his profound knowledge in numerous discussions on philosophy, principles, and conduct. 

**Original Works:**

1. Jain Tattvamīmāṁsā
2. Jain Dharma aur Varṇa-Vyavasthā
3. Viśvaśānti aur Aparigrahavāda
4. Varṇa, Jāti aur Dharma

**Edited Works:**

Over fifty, including numerous volumes of Dhavalā and Jayadhavalā, Prameyralamālā, Pañcādhȳāyī, Mahābandha, Samyasāra-Kalaśa, Labdhisāra-Kṣapaṇāsāra, Ātmānuśāsana, and other prominent texts of Āgama literature.

Page #568:
---------------------------
Indian Jnanpith Foundation: Established in 1944. Objective: Research and publication of lost, unavailable and unpublished material of knowledge and creation of public welfare original literature. Founder: Late Sahu Shantiprasad Jain, Late Smt. Rama Jain. President: Shri Ashok Kumar Jain. Office: 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003.

