Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003447/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
In memory of 
Sw. Pujya Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj,
organized by
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni
and
BAS
Uvasagadsaos
[Original - Translation - Interpretation - Notes - Appendix included] 

Page #2:
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 3
Om Arha
[ Organized in the auspicious memory of the most revered Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj ] Pancham Ganadhar Bhagavatsudharma - Swami-Praneet Saptam Ang
Upasakadashang Sutra
[ Original Text, Hindi Translation, Commentary, Appendix Included ]
Inspiration
(Sw.) Up-Pravartak Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj
Aadyasanyojak Tatha Pradhan Sampadak
(Sw.) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar'
Translator - Commentator - Editor
Dr. Chaganlal Shastri, M.A. (Hindi, Sanskrit, Prakrit, Jainology) P-H.D. Kavya Tirth, Vidya Mahodadhi
Publisher
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan) 

Page #3:
---------------------------
Jinagam-Granthamala: Granthank 3
Nirdéshan Adhyatmayogini Vidushi Mahasati Shri Umravkunvarji M.Sa. 'Archana'
Sampadakmandal (Sw.) Acharya Shri Devendramaniji M.Sa. 'Shastri' (Sw.) Anuyogpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M.Sa. 'Kamal' Vaanibhushan Shri Ratnamuni Ji M. Sa. (Sw.) Pandit Shri Shobhachandrji Bharill
Samprerak U. Pr. Muni Shri Vinaykumarji 'Bheem'
Chaturth Sanskaran July, 2006 E. Vikram Samvat 2063
Prakashk Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar (Rajasthan) Byawar - 305901 Phone: 250087
Mudrak
Mehta Offset 29, Somnath Colony, College Road, Byawar-305901. Phone: 01462-253990
3
Muly: 65/- Rupees 

Page #4:
---------------------------
Published on the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj
Fifth Ganadhar Sudharma Swami Compiled
Seventh Anga
UPASAKADASANGA SUTRA
[Original Text, Hindi Version, Notes, Annotation and Appendices etc.)
Inspiring Soul Up-pravartaka Shasansevi (Late) Swami Shri Brijlalji Maharaj
Shri Beligger en stor
Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj Madhukar'
Editor & Annotator Dr. ChhaganlalShastri, M.A., Ph. D.
Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti
Beawar (Raj.) 

Page #5:
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 3
Direction Mahasati Shri Umravkunwarji M. Sa. "Archana"
Board of Editors (Late) Achrya Shri Devendra Muni Ji 'Shastri Anuyogapravartaka Muni shri Kanhaiyalal Ji 'Kamal' Vaani Bhushan Shri Ratan Muni Ji (Late) Pt. Shri Shobhachandra Ji Bharilla
0
Promotor Muni Shri Vinay Kumar Ji "Bhim"
Fourth Edition Vikram Samvat 2063 July 2006
Publishers Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Brij-Madhukar Smriti Bhawan Pipaliya Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) [India] Pin - 305 901 Phone : 250087
0
Printer Mehta Offset 29, Somnath Colony College Road, BEAWAR 305901 Phone : 01462 - 253990
o
Price : Rs. 65/ 

Page #6:
---------------------------
卐 The Great Mantra ॥  Namo Arihantanam, Namo Siddhanam, Namo Ayariyanam, Namo Uvvajhayanam,
Namo Loesavva Sahunam, Eso Panch Namo-kkaro, Savpaavapanasana ॥ Mangalanam cha Savesim, Padham Havai Mangalam ॥
Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muniji M. Sa. 

Page #7:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. Ahimsa (non-violence)
2. Satya (truthfulness)
3. Asteya (non-stealing)
4. Brahmacharya (continence)
5. Aparigraha (non-attachment) 

Page #8:
---------------------------
G0200
Dedication
To the one whose heart is overflowing with divine sweetness, whose speech possesses extraordinary power, whose ability to perform duty is unique,
to
Shri Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain Shraman Sangh's pillar, Shraman Surya, poet, great elder, Marudhar Kesari, founder,
Muni Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj
at the lotus feet of whom, with humble respect and devotion.
0 Madhukar Muni
(From the first edition) 

Page #9:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #10:
---------------------------
**The Light of Illumination**

A new wave of enthusiasm for literary publication arose on the auspicious occasion of the 25th Nirvana Shatabdi of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir. Almost every prestigious publishing house in India published literature related to Bhagwan Mahavir, according to their own resources and time. Thus, at that time, a vast amount of literature related to Jain Dharma Darshan and the extraordinary life of Bhagwan Mahavir and his benevolent teachings was created and published.

On this occasion, a noble feeling arose in the mind of the late scholar-gem, Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji M. 'Madhukar', that abundant literature related to Bhagwan Mahavir was being published. This is fine, but our connection with Shraman Bhagwan Mahavir today is through his world-purifying words, about which it is said:

"Savvajgajeevarakkhanadayattayaaye pavayanam bhagavayaa sukahyam."

That is, Bhagwan's Dharma-Deshana was manifested for the protection and compassion of all beings in the world. Therefore, to propagate and spread this Bhagavadvani is an act of compassion for all beings. There can be no greater work for world welfare than this. Therefore, the original and sacred words of Bhagwan, which are contained in the Agamas, should be made accessible to all.

Yuvacharya Shriji presented his feelings to some senior Agama-loving Shravaks and scholars. Gradually, Yuvacharya Shriji's feeling and the discussion of editing and publishing the Agamas gained momentum. The wise and literary-loving Shraman and Shravak class appreciated and approved of this most sacred work.

Thus, when the idea of Agama publication received sufficient support from all sides, a meeting of the leading Shravaks and scholars of the society was organized in Yuvacharya Shriji's V.S. 2035 Byaver Chaturmas, and the framework of publication was discussed. After long deliberation and contemplation on every aspect of the plan, on Vaishakh Shukla 10, which was the auspicious day of Bhagwan Mahavir's Keval Gyan Kalyanak, the publication of Agama Battisi was announced and the work was started.

The expected cooperation of the scholarly class was received for the success of the work. Scholars are always eager to do such work and feel a sense of self-satisfaction by doing such work, but the Shravak class also expressed their willingness to cooperate with body, mind, and wealth, and established an institution called 'Shri Agama Prakashan Samiti' in Byaver for the systematic operation of the work and arranged the necessary funds.

Page #11:
---------------------------
Initially, it was planned to publish the scriptures in the order of *Acharanga* etc., but it was realized that the editing and translation of a vast *Agam* like *Bhagavati* would take a long time, and keeping the publication of other *Agams* on hold until then would also take more time. The objective of initiating the plan to impart theoretical knowledge to the readership would also be delayed, and the auspicious work should be completed as soon as possible. Therefore, it was decided that whatever scriptures are available should be published.

As the *Agam* texts were published, the readership also expanded, and these texts were also included in the curricula of many universities. Therefore, it was decided again that the fourth edition should be published when the first three editions become unavailable, so that all readers have access to the complete *Agambattisi* forever. This fourth edition is being published in accordance with this decision.

We are grateful to the many enlightened saints, scholars, and the community for their appreciation of the present publications, which has boosted our enthusiasm and provided support. We expect the readers to study the *Agam* literature and become collaborators in the propagation of *Jinavani*.

With this hope and belief,
Ratanchand Modi, Working President
Gyanchand Binaykia, Minister
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byaver
[8] 

Page #12:
---------------------------
## Introduction
(From the First Edition)

The fundamental basis of Jainism, philosophy, and culture is the word of the Vitaraga Sarvagna. Sarvagna means the one who sees the self. Only those who see the self completely can see the entire universe. Those who know the whole can truly explain the knowledge of the elements. They can truly preach the path to liberation, which is beneficial to all.

The knowledge of the elements, self-knowledge, and proper conduct as stated by the Sarvagnas are known as 'Agam', 'Shastra', or 'Sutra'.
The word of the Tirthankaras is like a shower of free flowers. Great wise Ganadharas compile it in the form of Sutras and give it the form of a systematic 'Agam'.

What we call 'Agam' today was called 'Ganipitaka' in ancient times. 'Ganipitaka' includes the entire Dvadasanga. Later, its parts, sub-parts, roots, holes, etc. were divided into many categories.

There was no tradition of writing, so the Agams were preserved based on memory or through the Guru-Parampara. For almost a thousand years after Bhagwan Mahavira, the 'Agam' followed the tradition of memory. Due to weakness of memory, the breakdown of the Guru-Parampara, and many other reasons, the knowledge of the Agam gradually disappeared. The water of the great lake dried up, leaving only a small puddle. Then, Devarddigni Kshamashraman called a meeting of the Shramans and, with the holy purpose of preserving the knowledge of the Agam, which was disappearing due to memory errors, and preserving the word of the Jinas, made the historic effort to write it down. He made the word of the Jinas into a book and did an indescribable favor to future generations. This was an amazing undertaking to keep the stream of Jainism, philosophy, and culture flowing. This first compilation of the Agams was completed 980 or 993 years after the Nirvana of the Veer.

After being written down, the form of the Jain Agams was basically preserved. However, due to the defects of time, external attacks, internal differences of opinion, conflict, weakness of memory, and negligence, the pure stream of Agam knowledge and the proper Guru-Parampara of understanding gradually weakened. Many important references, words, and hidden meanings of the Agams became fragmented. The Agams that were written were:
1. "Attham Bhasai Araha Suttam Ganthanthi Ganahara Niunam."
[9] 

Page #13:
---------------------------
They were not completely pure either. Those who could impart the true meaning of the scriptures were also rare. Due to many other reasons, the stream of Agamic knowledge became constricted.
In the sixteenth century Vikram era, Lokashah made a revolutionary effort. A bold attempt to expound the pure and true meaning of the Agamas was revived. But after some time, obstacles arose again. Communal hatred, doctrinal disputes, and the lack of linguistic knowledge of the scribes became a major obstacle to the attainment of the Agamas and their proper understanding.
In the early nineteenth century, when the tradition of printing the Agamas began, readers found some relief. When the ancient commentaries, churni, and niyukti of the Agamas were published and the simple and clear meaning of the Agamas was made available to the readers in print based on them, the study of Agamic knowledge naturally increased, hundreds of inquisitive people developed a tendency towards Agamic self-study, and Jain and non-Jain scholars from India and abroad also began to study the Agamas.
It is difficult to mention the names of all the scholars and wise monks who made historical contributions to the work of publishing, editing, and printing the Agamas due to the lack of sufficient material. However, I will definitely mention the names of some great monks of the Sthanakvasi tradition.
Reverend Shri Amolkarishiji Maharaj was a great courageous and determined monk of the Sthanakvasi tradition, who, despite limited resources, translated all thirty-two sutras into Hindi, making them accessible to the masses. The editing and publication of the entire thirty-two was a historical work, which benefited the entire Sthanakvasi and Terapanthi society. A resolution of Gurudev Pujya Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj:
When I was studying the Agamas under the guidance of Gurudev Late Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj, some Agamas published by the Agamoday Samiti were available. Gurudev used to make me study based on them. Seeing them, Gurudev felt that this edition, although quite laborious and also quite pure among the editions available so far, still has many unclear places. There is also a difference somewhere in the original text and its commentary, somewhere the commentary is very brief.
Gurudev Swami Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj himself was a profound scholar of Jain sutras. His intellect was very sharp and argumentative. Seeing this state of Agamic literature, he was very pained and expressed many times that if there was a pure, beautiful, and universally useful publication of the Agamas, it would benefit many people. Due to some circumstances, his resolution remained limited to just a feeling.
Meanwhile, Acharya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj, Jain Dharma Divakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj, Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj, etc. learned monks gave beautiful explanations and commentaries on the Agamas.
[१०] 

Page #14:
---------------------------
He has completed this deficiency by writing or having it written under his supervision.
Currently, Acharya Shri Tulsi of the Terapanth sect has also started this Herculean effort and their Agam work is progressing well. Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' is making a unique and important effort to classify the pronouncements of the Agams into Anuyogs.
The learned Shraman, late Muni Shri Punyavijayji of the Svetambar Murtipujak tradition, had started a very systematic and excellent work in the direction of Agam editing. After his demise, this beautiful effort is continuing under the supervision of Muni Shri Jambuvijayji.
After observing all these works in a panoramic view, a resolve arose in my mind. Today, somewhere the original text of the Agams is being published and somewhere extensive commentaries on the Agams are being written. One is incomprehensible to the reader, while the other is complex. There should be an effort that follows the middle path, revealing the essence of Agamvani, which is both easy to understand, simple, concise, but comprehensive and easy.
Gurudev wanted the same. Keeping that sentiment in mind, I started thinking about this subject 4-5 years ago. After long contemplation, on V.S. 2036, Vaishakh Shukla 10, Mahavir Kaivalya Divas, I made a firm decision and started the editing and commentary work of Agam-Battisi, and now the Agam texts are gradually reaching the hands of the readers, I am very happy about it.
This historical work of Agam editing has been organized in the memory of our revered Gurudev. Today, his auspicious memory is making my mind joyful. Along with this, the inspirations of my venerable Guru-brother, revered Swami Shri Hazarimlalji Maharaj - his Agam devotion and profound knowledge of Agam, ancient beliefs, have been my support. Therefore, I am overwhelmed in the memory of both those heavenly souls.
The guidance of Shasansevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj, the encouragement of enthusiasm, the companionship-strength of the service-minded disciple Muni Vinaykumar, service-cooperation, and the humble inspirations of Mahasati Shri Kanakunwarji, Mahasati Shri Jhankarkunwarji, Paramvidushi Mahasati Shri Umraovkunwarji, M.Sa. Archana - have always been helpful in keeping me motivated and dedicated to my work.
I have firm faith that I will continue to receive full cooperation from all my colleagues, listeners and scholars in completing this long and arduous task of editing Agam-vani, and I will remain dynamic in achieving my goal. With this hope.....
- Muni Mishrimal 'Madhukar'
[11] 

Page #15:
---------------------------
First Edition's Meaningful Collaborator
Late Shri Seth Pukharajji Sheesodia
(Life-Line)

Seth Pukharajji Sa. Sheesodia's personality is unique. His vision is so sharp and comprehensive that he acts as a kind of conductor and advisor to the society around him. Perhaps he is as concerned about his domestic affairs as he is about other matters. Looking at Shri Sheesodia's life, one is immediately reminded of the public life of those ancient Shravakas from whom every person in society received advice and protection.

Sheesodia was born in Samvat 1968 on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of Margashirsha in Byawar. His father's name was Shri Hiralalji. Your father's financial situation was ordinary. Education was also limited to the commercial field. In those days, there were not as many resources available for education as there are today. Your father passed away during your childhood. Due to all these reasons, Sheesodia did not get the opportunity to receive higher education. But the fruit of education, the ability to acquire, and the development of physical, mental and intellectual powers, he possesses those abilities and powers in abundance. He has an innate talent. The scope of his talent is very wide. The success you have achieved in the business field and in other social and religious fields is due to your talent as well as other unique qualities of your personality.

It is not difficult to imagine how miserable the situation of someone who has a normal financial situation and is deprived of his father's protection in childhood can be. But one also sees rare noble souls who, without anyone's support, without anyone's cooperation and without anyone's help, only by the strength of their own personality, by their own efforts and prowess, and by their own intelligence, crush all the obstacles that come in the way of their life's development and keep moving forward and reach the pinnacle of success.

Your father passed away in Samvat 1980. At that time, your family consisted of your grandfather, mother and sister. After your father's passing, all directions were filled with darkness for Sheesodia. But feelings of helplessness, compulsion, humility and inferiority could not even come near him. Not only that, the adversity of circumstances made your courage, determination and morale even stronger and you stepped into the field of karmabhoomi. At the tender age of twelve, you started a simple business with a loan of two hundred rupees. How much effort and how much caution must have been taken to increase that small capital, and how much labor must have been done, it is difficult to even guess. But with strong willpower and
[12] 

Page #16:
---------------------------
The year is [year].
Sheeshiodiya ji is a living example of the truth that all adversity is overcome in the face of *purushartha* and the gates of success open.
Today, Sheeshiodiya ji is a great *lakshadhish* and among the dignitaries of the city. Byawar city is the main center of your business. You have three shops in different markets of Byawar. One shop is in Ajmer. You have also had shops in Kishangarh-Madanganj, Vijayanagar and Sojat Road. You primarily deal in *aadh* business. Your business area is most of India.
Sheeshiodiya ji's business work is so well-organized and smooth that the partners and *munims* working in your shop also gain value in the city. Working for you is considered a great qualification for a person. All the partners or *munims* who have separated from your firms are today running their own good business with great pride and qualification. They have also made a name for themselves in business. In such a situation, it is natural for your sons to be business-savvy. They have taken over a lot of your responsibility. This is why you get time for public, religious and social work.
You are associated with many institutions of the city. You are serving as president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, advisor and member of some institutions. You have served many institutions. But the special thing is that you handle the work of the institution with full interest and dedication. You are the main pillar of Shri Marudharakesari Sahitya Prakashan Samiti, Muni Shri Hazarimala Smriti Prakashan, Aagam Prakashan Samiti, Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Veer Sangh. You are also giving full contribution to other institutions of the city like Gosala, Chamber Sarrafan etc.
In this way, Sheeshiodiya ji is a completely self-made and self-respected gentleman. You have earned lakhs of wealth through your own ability and determination. But you have not been satisfied with just earning wealth, but you are also using it for social and religious work. You have established a charitable trust with one lakh rupees. Besides this, no one ever goes empty-handed from you. You have helped many institutions a lot. You are the pillar of Aagam Prakashan Samiti and you are running it as the acting president.
The entire cost of publication of the present 'Upasakdashaang' sutra has been borne by the acting president of the committee, Shri Sheeshiodiya ji, who has made a significant contribution. The committee is indebted to you for this generous support.
[13] 

Page #17:
---------------------------
## Introduction
(From the First Edition)
**The Main Foundation of Religion**
The foundation of the eternal life of any religion is its scripture. The scripture safeguards the principles upon which the edifice of religion stands. Leaving aside the branches and sub-branches, the main religions in India are Vedic, Buddhist, and Jain. The Vedic religion's primary literature is the Vedas, the Buddhist religion's is the Pitaka, and similarly, the Jain religion's primary literature is available in the form of Agamas.

**Agamas**
Agamas are indicative of specific knowledge, connected to direct or similar understanding. In other words, it can be said that the collection of principles expounded by Aapta Purushas (perfect beings) whose knowledge became completely pure and unblemished, free from doubt, due to the removal of hindering causes or karmas, is called Agama.

The primary literature that we have today in the form of Agamas was spoken by the last Tirthankara, Bhagwan Mahavira, and compiled by his chief disciples, the Ganadharas.

Acharya Bhadrabahu has written: "The Arhat (perfect being) speaks the meaning. The Ganadharas, for the benefit of the Dharma-shasana (religious teachings) or the Dharma-sangha (religious community), skillfully compile it in the form of Sutras. Thus, the Sutra is established."

This means that the sentiments expressed by Bhagwan Mahavira in his teachings were put into words by the Ganadharas.

**The Language of Agamas**
The language of the Vedas is ancient Sanskrit, which is called Chandas or Vedic. The Buddhist Pitaka is in Pali, which is based on Magadhi Prakrit. The language of the Jain Agamas is Ardhamagadhi Prakrit. The Arhat delivers his religious teachings in this language.

The Samavayanga Sutra states: "The Bhagwan narrates the Dharma in the Ardhamagadhi language." The Ardhamagadhi spoken by the Bhagwan...

1. Aapta-vachanad-aavirbhutam-artha-sanvedanam-agamah.
Upacarad-aapta-vachanam cha.  Praman-nay-tatva-alok 4.1, 2.
2. Attham bhasai arhaha, suttam ganthati ganahara niunam.
Sasanas-sa hiyatthae, tao suttam pavattehi.  Aavashyak Nirukti 92.
[14] 

Page #18:
---------------------------
Language transforms into the language of all, whether Aryan, non-Aryan, bipeds, quadrupeds, deer, animals, birds, reptiles, and so on; it becomes beneficial, auspicious, and conducive to their happiness.
The Acharanga Churni also mentions this same sentiment. It states that the great souls, compassionate towards all beings, including women, children, the elderly, and the illiterate, preached the principles in the Ardhamagadhi language.
_Ardhamagadhi is a dialect of Prakrit. The Dashavaikalika Vritti, while mentioning that the Lord's teachings were in Prakrit, expresses a similar sentiment as above:
"For the benefit of children, women, the elderly, and the foolish-illiterate-all those who desire good conduct, the enlightened ones composed the principles in Prakrit."2 Ardhamagadhi
The time of Lord Mahavira was a period when various kinds of rigidities were prevalent in the religious world. One of them was the rigidity of language. Sanskrit was considered the language of religious discourse. Sanskrit was not prevalent among the common people. Ordinary people could not understand it. In everyday speech, Prakrit languages were prevalent. There were many varieties of these, depending on the region, of which Magadhi, Ardhamagadhi, Shaurseni, Paisachi, and Maharashtri were prominent. Ardhamagadhi and Magadhi were prevalent in eastern India, while Shaurseni was prevalent in the west. Paisachi was the language of the northwest. Maharashtri was used in the central region. Ardhamagadhi was prevalent in the region between Shaurseni and Magadhi. Thus, Ardhamagadhi proves to be a language between Magadhi and Shaurseni. That is, some of its forms are like Magadhi and some are like Shaurseni. This is probably why it got the name Ardhamagadhi.
Magadhi has three main characteristics. There, only the palatal 'sh' is used for 'sh', 'sh', and 's'. 'l' comes in place of 'r'. In the first case of nouns ending in 'a', the 'e' ending is used. In Ardhamagadhi, about half of these three characteristics are found. The palatal 'sh' is not used there at all. In nouns ending in 'a', 'e' is used in the first case most of the time. 'l' is used in place of 'r' in some places.
There is another peculiarity in the declensional structure of Ardhamagadhi. There, in the seventh case, along with 'e' and 'mmi', the suffix 'ansi' is also used, such as - nayare nayarammi, nayaransi.
1. Bhagavan cha nam Ardhamaghiye bhasaye dhammamaikkhai. Savi ya nam Ardhamaghi bhasa bhasijjamaani tesim savvesim ariyamanaariyaanm dupppay-chaupppay-miy-pasu-sarisivaanm appano hiy-siv suhaybhasattaye parinamahi.
-Samavayangasutra 34. 22. 23. 2. Balastrivruddhamurkhaanam nrinam charitrakankshinam. Anugraharthe tatvagnaih siddantah prakrtah krtah.
-Dashavaikalika Vritti page 223.
[15]

Page #19:
---------------------------
The Navangi commentator Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, in the *Aupapatik Sutra*, while describing the language of Lord Mahavira's teachings, has described Ardhamagadhi as a language that uses the sounds 'l' and 'sh' sometimes, as they are used in Magadhi, and mostly uses Prakrit.
In the commentary on the *Vyakhyaprajnapti Sutra*, he has also mentioned that Ardhamagadhi has some characteristics of Magadhi and some of Prakrit.
Acharya Abhaydeva has probably used the term Prakrit here for Shauraseni. Shauraseni Prakrit may have been more prevalent in his time.
Acharya Hemachandra, in his *Prakrit Vyakaran*, has called Ardhamagadhi *Aarsh* (the language of the Rishis). He has written that all the rules of grammar do not apply to the *Aarsh* language, because it has many variations.
This means that Ardhamagadhi is a mixture of other Prakrits.
Another Prakrit grammarian, Markandeya, has mentioned about Ardhamagadhi that it is very close to Shauraseni, meaning that it has many characteristics of Shauraseni. This also means that it is called Ardhamagadhi because it has many characteristics of Shauraseni and some of Magadhi.
Kramadisvara has mentioned that Ardhamagadhi is a mixture of Magadhi and Maharashtri. This also implies that Ardhamagadhi is a mixture of Magadhi, Shauraseni and Maharashtri. In the *Nishitchurni*, it is mentioned about Ardhamagadhi that it was the language spoken in half of Magadha and it was a mixture of twenty-eight regional languages.
From these descriptions, it appears that Ardhamagadhi was used as a *lingua franca* in the Prakrit region at that time, which continued for some centuries later. According to some scholars, this was the original language of the Ashokan inscriptions, which was transformed into local forms.
Lord Mahavira used such a language as the medium of his teachings, which was accessible to the common people.

Page #20:
---------------------------
The simple should be easily accessible. This was the case in Ardhamagadhi. Children, elders, women, educated and uneducated people from the Prakrit-speaking regions could all understand it. The Anga-literature, the teachings of the Lord as compiled by the Ganadharas, were collected in the following twelve Angas: 
1. Achar, 2. Sutra-krit, 3. Sthan, 4. Samavay, 5. Vyakhya-prajnapti, 6. Jnatri-dharma-katha, 7. Upasaka-dasha, 8. Antakrid-dasha, 9. Anattaraupapatik-dasha, 10. Prasna-vyakaran, 11. Vipak, 12. Drishti-vad.
In ancient times, there was a tradition of memorizing scriptural knowledge. The Vedas, Pitakas, and Agamas all followed the tradition of memorization. At that time, people had excellent memory, physical strength, and stamina.

**Agam-Sankalan: The First Attempt**
For almost 560 years after the Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, the tradition of Agam-knowledge continued as it was. Then there was a setback. A twelve-year famine struck Magadh. This happened during the reign of Chandragupta Maurya. Jain monks scattered far and wide. Many perished. The Jain Sangha was concerned about the safety of Agam-knowledge. After the famine ended, a conference of Jain monks was held in Pataliputra under the leadership of Sthulabhadra to organize the Agamas. Eleven Angas were compiled in this conference. The twelfth Anga, Drishti-vad, was not remembered by anyone. Only Bhadra-bahu knew Drishti-vad. He was engaged in the practice of Maha-pran-dhyan in Nepal at that time. An attempt was made to obtain that knowledge from him. Sthulabhadra was able to obtain the knowledge of the meaning of ten Purvas out of the fourteen Purvas of Drishti-vad. He only received the text of the remaining four Purvas.
This was the first attempt to compile the Agamas. It is called the first reading or Pataliputra-vachana of the Agamas.
Thus, the Agamas were compiled, but the method of preserving them remained the same - memorization. It is important to note here that the Vedas were written in Sanskrit, which is a grammar-based language, while the Jain Agamas were written in the vernacular language, which was not bound by the strict rules of grammar. Therefore, over time, some changes began to occur in the language of the Agamas. This was not possible in the Vedas. There was another reason for this. To preserve the word structure of the Vedas in their original form, five forms were established: Samhita-path, Pada-path, Krama-path, Jata-path. These forms ensured that not a single word of any mantra could be changed. This was not possible with the Agamas.

**The Second Attempt**
Between 827-840 years after the Nirvana of Lord Mahavira, an attempt was made to organize the Agamas in a more systematic way.
[17] 

Page #21:
---------------------------
Another attempt was made. At that time too, a terrible famine like the previous one had fallen, in which many Jain monks passed away due to lack of alms. The practice of the Agamas did not continue in its usual form. Therefore, they began to be forgotten. After the famine ended, a gathering of monks was held in Mathura under the leadership of Arya Skandil. The Agamas were compiled in an orderly manner, collecting whatever was remembered by each monk. This is called the Mathuri Vachana. This was the second attempt at compiling the Agamas.

Around the same time, a similar gathering of monks took place in Vallabhi, under the leadership of Nagarjuna Suri, in the region of Saurashtra, where an attempt was made to compile the Agamas. This falls under the second attempt or Vachana mentioned above. However, it is also called the first Vachana of Vallabhi.

The third attempt:

Until now, the same memorized order had continued. Further, some difficulties began to be experienced in this. People's memory became weaker than before, and their physical strength was not the same. Therefore, it seemed difficult to keep such vast knowledge in memory. The Agamas began to be forgotten. Therefore, after the aforementioned second attempt, 980 or 993 years after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira, a gathering of monks was held again in Vallabhi under the leadership of Devardhigani Kshamasraman. The context of the previous two Vachanas was present before the monks present at the gathering. In that context, they compiled the Agamas according to their memory. They took the Mathuri Vachana as the main basis. They coordinated the variations in readings, differences in Vachanas, etc., that were prevalent in different monk groups. In this gathering, the Agamas were written down, so that a definite form of them would be available to everyone in the future. Despite the effort, where the readings could not be coordinated, a reference to the alternative Vachana was made. The twelfth Anga, Drishtivad, could not be compiled, because it was not present with the monks. Therefore, its severance was declared. This was the third or final Vachana in the attempt to compile the Jain Agamas. It is also called the second Vallabhi Vachana. The Jain Agamas available today are in the form of the Agamas compiled in this Vachana.

The available Agamas are accepted by the Shvetambar tradition of Jainism. Their authenticity is not accepted in the Digambar tradition. There, it is believed that the Anga literature was lost 683 years after the Nirvana of Bhagwan Mahavira. They do not accept any text as a direct word-by-word concordance of the principles spoken by Mahavira. According to their belief, in the early centuries AD, an Acharya named Dharasen had a portion of the text preceding the Drishtivad Anga. He lived in the Chandragupta cave on Mount Girnar. There, he had two knowledgeable monks, Pushpadant and Bhootbali, write down his knowledge. This is known as the Shatkhandagama. It is revered as an Agama in the Digambar tradition. The two monks presented the written Shatkhandagama to the assembly on the fifth day of the bright half of the month of Jyeshtha. That day was considered an important day for the coming to light of the Shruta. It became famous as Shruta Panchami. Shruta Panchami is an important religious festival of the Digambar sect.

Page #22:
---------------------------


Page #23:
---------------------------
These seven Upanga Sutras and Uttaradhyayanas - this is one Mula Sutra, thus a total of thirteen Sutras come.
In Ganitanuyoga, Jambudvipaprajnapti, Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti - these three Upanga Sutras come.
In Dravyanuyoga, Sutrakrut, Sthan, Samavay and Vyakhyaprajnapti - these four Anga Sutras, Jivajivabhigam, Prajnapana - these two Upanga Sutras and Nandi and Anuyogadwar, these two Mula Sutras - thus a total of eight Sutras come. Upasakadasha
In the context of the present discussion, Upasakadasha is a part of Dharmakathaanuyoga. As its name suggests, it contains the stories of Upasakas or Shravakas.
In Jainism, from the perspective of sadhana, there is a division into two types: Shraman-Sangha and Shramanopasaka-Dharma. The word Shraman is used in the sense of a Sadhu or a renunciant. For a Shraman, self-realization is everything. The maintenance of physical life is one thing, but a Shraman cannot do it at the cost of sadhana. He accepts that his body may perish, but he does not accept even a slight harm to his sadhana under any circumstances. This is why there is no room for alternatives in his observance of vows, worship and restraint. On the day he enters Shraman-life, he comes with the resolve, "Savvam savajan jogam pacchakkhami", meaning from today I renounce all Savadya-papasamhit yogas - mental, verbal and physical activities. He becomes completely free from violence, falsehood, theft, adultery and attachment through these three yogas of mind, speech, body and these three karmas of done, caused and approved. He never does violence, nor causes it, nor approves of it. He does not think so in his mind, nor speaks so with his words. This same order applies to all the vows. Since there is no exception or alternative, here the vows are called Mahavrata.
Maharshi Patanjali has also called those yamas or vows, which have no limits of caste, country, time, etc., which are universal - to be observed in all situations, i.e., where no exception is allowed, Mahavrata. ' The sadhana-krama of a Grihi Upasaka
_ The complete, perfect or flawless observance of Mahavrata is not possible for everyone. Only a few steadfast, strong-willed and cultured men are capable of achieving it.
There is another path, lighter and easier than the sadhana of Mahavrata, in which the sadhaka accepts vows in a limited form according to his capacity. For such a sadhaka, the Jain scriptures use the term Shramanopasaka. There are two words in it: Shraman and Upasaka. The literal meaning of Upasaka is one who sits near. One who sits in the presence of a Shraman, i.e., accepts good knowledge and vows from a Shraman, 1. Jati-desha-kala-samaya-anavachchhinnaah sarvabhauma mahavrata. Patanjali Yogadarshan Sadhanapad 31 1. Up-samepe, aste-ityupasaka.
[20]

Page #24:
---------------------------
In his life dedicated to the great vows, he himself is inspired and ascends the path of sadhana or worship, he is a Shramanopasak. This is the way to achieve worship or adoration. It is not possible for life to change just by reading or listening. The proximity of a life filled with sadhana, great vows, and high sadhana creates a zeal and a desire in the mind of the individual to move towards it. Therefore, the use of the word Shramanopasak for a householder sadhak is truly meaningful.

In the same context, there is a beautiful explanation in the Chandogya Upanishad. It is written there:
"When the power is awakened in the person who is engaged in sadhana, he rises, that is, he makes internal preparations. Rising, he serves, he moves towards it with his inner strength. Then he sits near the Guru, observes his life, listens to him [about the principles of Dharma], contemplates what he has heard, becomes enlightened, and conducts himself accordingly in life. When this happens, he is called a knower, a special knower, having practiced what he knows."

The Upanishad writer has analyzed the fruition of sadhana from a psychological perspective in a very beautiful way. The role of a Shramanopasak is also almost the same. He does not become a Shramanopasak just by sitting near a Shraman, nor does he become so just by listening. The true implementation of Shramanopasaktva happens when he renounces the false and is devoted to the true. In Jain terminology, he rejects Samyak Savadhana and accepts vows.

Another word for Shramanopasak is Shravak. This word is derived from the root 'shru'. The meaning of Shravak is a listener. Here, Shravak - listener is a figurative word. By listening to the teachings of the Shraman, he becomes a listener, but not a Shravak. He receives the designation of Shravak only when he accepts the vows. The vows of a Shravak are a psychological process.

In Jainism, the process of accepting vows by a Shramanopasak or Shravak is also very scientific. He accepts non-violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-possession, but in a limited way. That is, he accepts these vows with some exceptions, according to the inner strength and ability he is able to gather. Thus, the vows accepted by a Shravak are less or smaller than the vows of a Shraman in terms of observance, therefore they are called Anuvratas. The vow itself is not great or small. The adjectives great or small are applied to the vow due to the ability or capacity of the observer. As mentioned above, where the sadhak does not see any deficiency or lack in his inner strength, he fully, completely observes the vow.
1.  "When he becomes strong, then he rises, rising he serves, serving he sits near, sitting near he sees, he contemplates, he understands, he acts, he knows."
- Chandogya Upanishad 7.8.1
[21]

Page #25:
---------------------------
He is diligent in observing it. It is a great task. That is why his vows are called **mahavrata**. Where the practitioner observes the vow with limits and exceptions, his observance of the vow is less or small, for that reason **anu** is added to the vow.
  A very big feature of Jainism is that there is no fixed form of exceptions in the vows of the **Shravakas**. The same vow of non-violence can be accepted by many devotees with many kinds of exceptions. The abilities and strengths of different individuals are of different types. Enthusiasm, self-strength, and courage are not the same. In countless individuals, it can be of countless types according to their own **kshayopashama**. Therefore, the individual has his own freedom in accepting exceptions. Exceptions cannot be forcibly imposed on him. This gives an opportunity to come into practice to individuals who are eager for resources of all kinds, less, more - all kinds of power. Then gradually the practitioner increases his strength and moves forward. He reduces the exceptions. Doing so, he can become a **Shramanopasaka** in the role of a **Shramanabhoot-Shramanasadrish**. This is a profound
scientific fact. To move forward, to progress, as it is achieved from an uncommitted, primordial mind, it cannot be achieved from a committed and suppressed mind. It is no exaggeration to say that this method of Jainism in household practice is undoubtedly unparalleled. By **atichaar-varjan** etc., its psychology becomes deeper, due to which the life of the vow-taker gets a universal sacred form. **Upasakadasha**: Inspiring subject matter
. **Upasakadasha** is the only sutra in the **Angasutras** which discusses the entire life of a **Shramanopasaka** or **Shravaka**. It depicts the lives of ten **Shramanopasakas** - Anand, Kamadeva, Chulnipita, Suradeva, Chullashatak, Kundakaul, Sakadalputra, Mahashatak, Nandinipita and Salihipita - who were contemporaries of Lord Mahavira. These were the main **Shravakas** of Lord Mahavira. Prosperous life: Both worldly and otherworldly
The first study of **Upasakadasha** gives an account of the devotional life of a **Shravaka** named Anand. It is clear from the descriptions given in various contexts that the economic condition of India was very good at that time. The figures given for the wealth of Anand and other **Shravakas** mentioned in the present sutra seem to be fabricated, but the reality is not so. In fact, due to vast land, large livestock, and relatively small population, there were also some such special wealthy people. The value of money was often measured in gold coins.
It seems that the minds of the wealthy people of that time did not want to lose their peace of mind in the desire to keep increasing their wealth. They did not have faith in such growth, which would one day destroy everything. Therefore, the capital of the ten **Shramanopasakas** mentioned here was kept separate as a **reserve fund**. Daily for the use of the family at home
[२२] 

Page #26:
---------------------------
1. They would also invest a third of their wealth in goods, resources, and materials. There was also a sense of utility, convenience, and grandeur or prestige. They were aware of the three movements of giving, enjoying, and destroying wealth, so they were also interested in proper enjoyment. A third of their wealth was invested in business. Even if there was a loss in business, or even if all the capital was lost, their well-established and well-established system would not break down. Therefore, there was a sense of peace and tranquility in their lives. Only then was it possible for them to receive the benefit of the vision and presence of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira and turn their lives from enjoyment to renunciation.
When a person, inspired by self-motivation, accepts a life of renunciation, he begins to find joy in renunciation, just as he found joy in enjoyment, and the special thing is that this joy is pure, healthy, and beneficial. It is surprising to see the joy and the very prosperous and comfortable life of other Shraman Upasakas on the one hand, and on the other hand, when they move forward on the path of renunciation, they become so engrossed in it that enjoyment itself fades away. The body becomes a skeleton, but they remain supremely satisfied and joyful. This is never possible without the experience of the taste of renunciation.
An amazing event: The dignity of truth
One event in the life of Anand is very important. As a result of penance and practice, Anand becomes an Avadhijnani by the destruction of the Avadhijnana Avarana. In a conversation with Gautam, the chief Antavasis of Bhagwan Mahavira, about the limits of Avadhijnana, a controversial issue arises. Bhagwan Mahavira explains Anand's point of view correctly. Gautam goes to Anand and apologizes. This is a very inspiring incident. Anand was a householder practitioner. Gautam was the most important of the eleven Ganadharas of Bhagwan Mahavira. But, how much righteousness and lack of ego there was in them. They happily apologize to their follower, their worshiper. This is how high the ideal of Jainism is, the individual is great. Everyone should be committed to truth. This results in and emerges, a householder can also advance very far on the path of practice because the basis of the excellence of practice is the purity of self-transformations. The more one practices, the higher one can ascend.
The test of practice
Shreyansin Bahuvighanani - There are many obstacles in auspicious works, we often see and read this.
Out of the ten Upasakas of the present Agam, six faced upsargas or obstacles in their lives. Four of them were ultimately disturbed by the obstacles, but they immediately recovered. Two remained completely unshakable and steadfast. Upsargas are of both favorable-unfavorable or alluring-destructive types.
Another study is the case of Shraman Upasak Kamdev, who was engaged in practice in the Poshadshala. A god, in order to distract him, tore his body into pieces. He killed his sons brutally.
[23] 

Page #27:
---------------------------
On the branch, that steadfast devotee did not waver even a single sesame seed. Although it was the reaction-inducing illusion of the god, it appeared real to Kamadeva. A human can remain steadfast in any task until the fear of death comes before him. But, Kamadeva did not care for bodily destruction. Then, the god touched the most tender part of his heart. A father loves letters very much. Those who do not have a son, they yearn for him. In front of Kamadeva, his three sons were murdered before his very eyes, but that strong-willed ascetic remained unmoved. That is why Lord Mahavira presented him as an example before the sadhus and sadhvis. Whoever remains steadfast in religion despite terrible obstacles, he is certainly an ideal for others.

The third study is about Chulnipita. Chulnipita also faced such an obstacle. He remained unmoved by the murder of his sons, but when the god threatened to kill his revered mother, he was shaken. He could not overcome his affection for his mother. He was in the high practice of spirituality, where such affection should not be an obstacle, but it became one. Chulnipita atoned for his mistake and became pure.

The fourth study is about the story of the Shramanopasaka Suradeva. An obstacle came in his practice. When the god who caused the misfortune saw him unaffected by the murder of his sons, he threatened to inflict sixteen terrible diseases on his body. A human can accept death, but a body ravaged by extremely terrible diseases becomes more terrifying for him than death. The same happened with Suradeva. His vow was broken. He introspected.

In the fifth study, Chullashatak was broken from his vow by the threat of the destruction of his wealth. For some people, wealth is dearer than sons, mother, life - all of them. They can bear everything else, but the fear of the destruction of wealth makes them very anxious and restless. Chullashatak remained silent even after the murder of his three sons, but he trembled at the thought of his wealth being scattered in the streets of Alambika [city].

The seventh study is about the story of Sakdalputra. He too remained unmoved until the murder of his sons, but when the threat of killing his wife Agni Mitra, who was not only the mistress of the house but also a unique collaborator in his religious life, came to the fore, he lost his courage.

One thing is particularly important here. If a person, due to some weakness in his mind, is displaced once and then introspects, atones, becomes pure and becomes dedicated to his goal, then that mistake does not happen again. It is not impossible to make a mistake, but to understand it after making a mistake, to feel remorse for it, and then to move forward on one's accepted path of practice - this is a sign of great excellence. The stories of the mistakes of the six devotees are of this kind. Due to the remaining affection, attachment, etc. in them, there was a deviation, but it did not last.

In the eighth study, a strange favorable obstacle comes before the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak. His main wife Revati, who was deeply addicted to alcohol, meat, gluttony and lust, was in the food hall and was eating food and
[24]

Page #28:
---------------------------
She wanted to distract the husband who was in meditation. On one side was the intense, radiant sun of renunciation, on the other, the darkness of sin. The darkness tried to engulf the light of renunciation, but it was completely unsuccessful. It could not shake the Maha Shatak. But a small mistake made the Maha Shatak fall from grace. Due to Revati's evil intentions, anger arose in his mind. He had clairvoyance. Using his clairvoyance, he predicted that Revati would die within seven days, with severe illness, pain, and suffering. It is not desirable to explicitly state the fear of death. The speaker must be particularly thoughtful and hesitant to speak what is true but causes fear and terror in the minds of others. Therefore, Lord Mahavira sent his chief disciple, Gautam, to warn the Maha Shatak. The Maha Shatak regained his composure.

The hero of the sixth study, Kundakaulik, is depicted as a knowledgeable devotee. A god is rendered speechless by destiny in a conversation with Kundakaulik. Lord Mahavira presents the wise Kundakaulik as an example to the monks and nuns. Kundakaulik's life is an inspiring example for devotees to advance in the field of knowledge.

**The Inclination Towards Reality**

The heroes of the ten studies of the devotee stage had very comfortable worldly lives. They had abundant and sufficient access to all material comforts. If this were the only attainable life, there would be nothing left for them to do. Why would they reduce their acquired pleasures to the point of complete annihilation? But they were wise. They knew the impermanence of material pleasures. Therefore, the true attainable of life, which, without attaining it, everything else attained is nothing more than irony, there is an unspoken yearning in man to attain it, which awakens instantly in all of them as soon as they receive the presence of Lord Mahavira. When the awakened yearning moved forward on the path of implementation, it continued to grow, and a time came in the lives of those seekers when they seemed to have completely forgotten bodily pleasures. They lost themselves so much in renunciation, in the learning of the self, that they did not even care about their own bodies, which were becoming increasingly thin and weak. This was the pleasant culmination of the renunciation of enjoyment. It is generally very difficult to find such a state in life. A human being raised in an environment of comfort and convenience panics at the mere thought of giving them up. But that is the talk of weak-minded men. The sage of the Upanishads said, "Nayamatma balahinen labhyah," which is very poignant. A weak-minded person, one without inner strength, cannot attain the soul. But a strong-minded, internally powerful man can easily do all that makes the weak tremble.

**Freedom from Social Responsibility: Leisure**

A man spends his entire life engaged in fulfilling his family, social, and worldly responsibilities. 

Page #29:
---------------------------
It is not accepted in Indian thought that a person should spend the last part of their life in contemplation, meditation, and practice of the soul when they are capable of fulfilling their duties to their family, society, and home. In Vedic Dharma, there are four stages of life: Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha, and Sannyasa. Brahmacharya is the time for studying and acquiring skills. Grihastha is the time for fulfilling worldly responsibilities. Vanaprastha is the time between Grihastha and Sannyasa, where a person gradually detaches themselves from worldly attachments and strives to reach Sannyasa. The Vedic scripture says, "One should repay the three debts and then dedicate their mind to liberation." This means that after fulfilling the debt to the Rishis (Brahmacharya), the debt to the ancestors (Grihastha), and the debt to the gods (Vanaprastha), a person should dedicate their life to liberation. This means completely detaching oneself from worldly desires and dedicating one's life to the pursuit of liberation.

While Jainism does not have such an Ashrama system, it does have a well-organized path for Shravakas to progress towards liberation. Shravaka-Pratimas are one form of this, where a householder gradually progresses towards liberation, forbearance, and a restrained lifestyle.

The ten Shravakas of Lord Mahavira were wise. They did not just listen to what they received from the Lord, as evidenced by their immediate acceptance of the Shravaka vows. They also held the intention to dedicate themselves to Dharma, free from worldly responsibilities, relationships, and attachments, when the time was right. The account of Ananda mentions that after receiving the vows from Lord Mahavira, he progressed towards liberation for fourteen years. In the fifteenth year, one night, he thought that his sons were now capable and he should take a break from his family and social responsibilities.

People in those times were very determined. They did not delay in implementing their good thoughts. Ananda did not delay either. The next day, he hosted a feast for his family, friends, and citizens, informed them of his decision, and in their presence, entrusted his eldest son with his family and social responsibilities. Hosting a feast for many people was not just a show of display. There was a psychological reason behind it. Entrusting responsibilities in the presence of respected and influential members of society held significance. The son accepting the responsibility in their presence was also important. This way, the son would not go back on his word. The respect for those people, the reverence for them, and the pleasant relationships with them would continue to inspire him to fulfill his responsibilities.

Just as Ananda did, the other nine Shramanopasakas did the same. They also appointed their sons to their respective positions in the management of social and family affairs in the presence of many influential people, after a collective feast. Their thoughts and actions were very beautiful. From this perspective, ancient India was truly excellent and desirable. The great poet Kalidasa, in his famous epic Raghuvansha, describes the Suryavanshi kings, the ancestors of Lord Rama, writing:
[26] 

Page #30:
---------------------------
"The Sun Dynasty king studied in his childhood, enjoyed worldly pleasures in his youth, embraced the path of monasticism and liberation in old age, and finally relinquished his body through yoga or samadhi.
Wisdom demands that a person should not die like an animal or an ordinary person. He should die through yoga or samadhi. He is not an animal, but a thoughtful human being. These ten devotees did the same. The death of these ten, samadhi-death, was a sacred and excellent death. There, death does not become sorrow, but a festival. Relinquishing the body through samadhi is definitely a death-festival. But, only those who are strong in self, whose life turns from potential to nature, are eligible for it.
Social situation
The ten Shraman Upasakas had an abundance of cattle. This reveals that cattle rearing was quite prevalent in India in those days. One who keeps so many cows must also have agricultural land in the same proportion. The agricultural land of Ananda is said to be 500 ploughs in quantity. The cow was a beast of use for milk, curd and ghee, but its calves were used as oxen for farming, carrying goods and pulling vehicles like chariots. In the life of the people of that time, the cow and the ox had a great importance.
In those days, people's lives were very organized. Every task had its own legal order and system. When the occasion arises for Shivananda etc. to go to see Lord Mahavira, there is mention of a religious superior vehicle, which is pulled by oxen. It was a special chariot, which was used for riding for religious purposes.
The quantity of food, drink, clothing, enjoyment, consumption etc. that Ananda did while accepting the Shravak-vrat throws light on the living conditions of that time. The quantity of abhyanga-vidhi mentions shatapaka and sahasrapaka oils. This reveals that Ayurveda was quite developed then. Many types of beneficial, valuable oils were prepared from medicines.
Food, living conditions etc. were very refined. Ananda quantifies green licorice for datun; milky gooseberry for washing the head, hair etc. and quantifies flour prepared by mixing fragrant substances with wheat flour etc. in ubtans. Special people also applied sandalwood, saffron etc. on their bodies.
People also had a taste for wearing ornaments. Big people wore less in number but more valuable ornaments. There was a special custom of wearing rings among men. Ananda had quantified ornaments in the form of his named ring. Even the oxen that pulled the chariot were adorned with gold and silver ornaments by the big people. 
1. Those who studied in childhood, those who were desirous of objects in youth. Those who were monastic in old age, relinquished their bodies through yoga in the end.
Raghuvansha Sarg 1
[27]"

Page #31:
---------------------------
They wore ornaments. They wore silver bells around their necks. They adorned themselves beautifully. This is revealed in the seventh study, where the religious vehicle of Amitra is described.
After meals, people also had a tendency to consume betel nut, betel leaf, and betel leaf spices.
Of the ten Shravakas described in this text, nine had one wife each. The Mahashataka had thirteen wives. This reveals that polygyny was also prevalent in some places at that time. On the occasion of marriage, daughters from their paternal homes were given movable and immovable property as gifts in prosperous families, over which they [daughters] had rights. All the wives of the Mahashataka received such property. Where there were many wives, there was also jealousy among co-wives, which is evident from the character of Revati, the main wife of the Mahashataka. She had all her co-wives murdered and seized their share of the property.
Almost every city had a garden outside where saints and sages stayed. Such gardens were for public use by the people.
The sixth and seventh studies mention the Sahasramravan garden. It appears that such gardens also existed in those days, where there were thousands of mango trees. This is also possible because the regions in question have a plentiful yield of mangoes, even today.
A peaceful place is needed for meditation, contemplation, reflection, and worship. Therefore, Shraman Upasakas used Poshadshalas for special worship. In addition, they also kept their own peaceful and quiet places in the form of gardens for meditation and worship. The sixth and seventh studies mention Kundakaul and Sakdalputra going to their Ashoka gardens to perform religious practices.
In the context of the vow of joy, there is a description of 15 karmadans under the transgressions of consumption-consumption-quantity vows, which are unrighteous for a Shravak. There, the fifth karmadan is called "explosion-karma". This includes digging mines, breaking stones, etc. This reveals that the mineral business was prevalent in those days. Rich merchants may have taken contracts for such work, and they may have arranged to have it done.
The trade of ivory, bone, leather, etc. was also prevalent then, which is expressed in the sixth karmadan called "dental-commerce".
The practice of slavery was prevalent in India then. The tenth karmadan, "hair-commerce", is indicative of this. - Commerce included the buying and selling of living creatures such as cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep, camels, horses, etc., as well as the buying and selling of slaves. Property included four-legged creatures as well as two-legged creatures. Two-legged creatures mainly included slaves. The intention of accepting this work as a karmadan is that a Shravak should not engage in the evil practice of slavery.
[28] 

Page #32:
---------------------------
"Do not buy or sell humans." This also implies that the Jain tradition was against slavery.

The above description makes it clear that the Jain Agamas are not only necessary to read for the knowledge of Jain principles, conduct, rituals, ethics, etc., but also their study is necessary and useful from the perspective of a comprehensive study of Indian society from two and a half thousand years ago. In fact, the Prakrit Jain Agamas and the Pali Tripitaka are the only such literature related to that period, which describes and discusses all aspects of people's lives. This is not a literature in which only the Kshatriya class or the aristocracy is praised or glorified. It depicts a realistic picture of all the big and small classes of society, including farmers, laborers, shepherds, merchants, masters, servants, kings, ministers, officials, etc.

As mentioned above, the Jain Agamas are in Ardhamagadhi Prakrit, which is heavily influenced by Maharashtri. Therefore, Dr. Hermann Jacobi even called the language of the Jain Agamas Jain Maharashtri, but it did not gain acceptance. In the Ardhamagadhi used in Upasakadasha, the 'y' sound of Maharashtri is used extensively, for example, both 'Savag' and 'Savay' forms are found in it. The language is simple, straightforward and flowing. The description is lively. Many descriptions are very poignant and touching. For example, in the second study, there is a description of the Dev who is a tormentor to distract the Shraman Upasak Kamadeva. The description of the Dev's Pisach form there presents a vivid picture of wonder, fear and disgust. There is a mention that there were mongooses hanging in place of earrings in his ears, he was wearing a garland of chameleons and mice, he had wrapped snakes around his body like a shawl, his body was covered with multi-colored hair of five colors. What a strange imagination it is. There are many more amazing adjectives there.

As is the style of the Agamas, the same thing is repeated many times. For example, if someone heard something from someone, if he has to tell it elsewhere, he will repeat the whole thing. This has happened in many places in the present Agamas.

To avoid unnecessary over-extension, the Agamas use 'Jav' and 'Vann'o' to indicate common descriptions, according to which this description is taken from other Agamas. This seemed necessary to preserve the Agamas by the method of memorization for centuries. Generally, the description of the king, the best, the caravan leader, the city, the garden, the stupa, the lake, etc. is almost the same. Therefore, a special form (Standard) of description was adopted for them, which was generally used for all kings, best, caravan leaders, cities, gardens, stupas, lakes, etc. The same has happened in the present Agamas.

Publication of Agamas with Hindi translation: In India, the original and accurate form of some Jain Agamas has been published from time to time.
[29]

Page #33:
---------------------------
The first publication of the thirty-two Agamas with Hindi translation took place in South Hyderabad almost six decades ago. The editing and translation were done by the renowned Agama scholar, the venerable Muni Shri Amolakrishiji Maharaj. Considering the time and situation then, this was certainly a significant work. Prior to this, Hindi-speaking people did not have the opportunity to read the Agamas. These Agamas were used by all Jain sects, monks and lay people. This was truly a commendable act of Shruta-seva. Today, those Agamas are out of print.

The second attempt to edit, translate and publish the thirty-two Agamas was made almost two decades later by Jain Shastracharya Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj from Karachi. After years of hard work, it was completed in Ahmedabad. He edited them with his own Sanskrit commentary and Hindi and Hindi-Gujarati translations. They are also not fully available today. The work of publishing Agamas in parts has generally been active. The first Acharya of the Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain Shraman Sangh, a great scholar of Agamas, the enlightened sage Pujya Atmaramji Maharaj, edited some Agamas with Sanskrit shadow, Hindi translation and commentary, which proved to be very useful. Today, all those Agamas are also not available. The Jain Shwetamber Terapanth is also working on the publication of Agamas. Some Agamas have been published with detailed discussions, commentaries, etc. All the efforts that have been made and are being made are commendable. Today's need

For years, there has been a need in the Hindi world for the publication of Agamas with Hindi translation in today's simple language and modern style. The Hindi-speaking region of the country is very vast. To give any literature in Hindi language means to reach it to millions of people.

Jain Agamas are not just for scholars, they have great utility for everyone. In today's complex age, when man needs a path to peace, they are even more useful.

For them to be useful to everyone, the publication of Agamas with original-based emotional translations and, where necessary, simple summaries, is a pressing need for the Hindi world today. It is a pressing need for the Jain world today. The renowned scholar and writer of the Jain world, Panditratna, the young Acharya of the Vardhaman Sthanakvasi Jain Shraman Sangh, Pujya Shri Madhukar Muniji Maharaj, had this thought in his mind for a long time. This is the result of his spiritual inspiration that the editing and translation of Agamas is moving rapidly in Byawar [Rajasthan]. Participation

For the past few years, I have had a respectful and cordial relationship with the venerable young Acharya Shri Madhukar Muniji Maharaj. His pure, clear, simple personality has left an impression on my mind. He is not only a senior scholar, but also a great respecter of scholars and virtuous people. I consider it my good fortune that I have his
[३०] 

Page #34:
---------------------------
I have received your heartfelt grace and sattvic affection. For the past thirty years, I have been working in the field of Indian studies (Indology) and especially in the field of Prakrit and Jainology (Jainology) in terms of study, research, writing, teaching, etc. This is a matter of my inner interest, not a profession. Therefore, I felt happy. My close friend, young sadhak and literary enthusiast, Shri Jatanrajji Mehta, a resident of Merta, who was appointed as the General Secretary of the Agam Prakashan Samiti, also inspired me especially. Knowing this beautiful opportunity to serve the Shruti, I showed enthusiasm. The work of the seventh Anga Upasakadasha came to me. I took up the work of Upasakadasha. Editing, translation, discussion
The first task was text editing. I obtained the following editions of Upasakadasha: 1. Upasakadasha Sutra - Editor, Dr. M.A. Rudolf Hornle. Publisher - Bengal Asiatic Society
Calcutta. First Edition: 1890 AD 2. Shrimad Abhaydevacharyavihitavivaranyutam Shrimad Upasakadasangam. Publisher - Agamoday Samiti, Mehsana,
First Edition 1920 AD 3. Upasakadasangasutram - Vritirachita - Jainshastracharya Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj. Publisher - Shri Shwetamber
Sthanakwasi Jain Sangh, Karachi. First Edition: 1936 AD 4. Shri Upasakadasangasutra - Translator - Jain Dharmadiwakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj. Publisher - Acharya
Shri Atmaram Jain Prakashan Samiti, Ludhiana. First Edition: 1964 AD. 5. Upasakadasangasutram - Translation - V. Ghisulal Pitlia. Publisher - A.B. Sadhumarg Jain Sanskriti
Rakshak Sangh, Sailana [Madhya Pradesh]. First Edition: 1977 AD. 6. Uvasgadasaao - Shrimad Abhaydev Suri Virachit Mul Ane Teekaana Anuvaad Sahit [Lipi- Devanagari,
Bhasha-Gujarati] Translator and Publisher - Pan. Bhagwandas Harshchandra. First Edition: VS 1992
AD, Jainanand Pustakalaya, Gopipura, Surat. 7. Angasuttani - 3. Editor - Muni Nathmalji. Publisher - Jain Vishwa Bharati, Ladnun. First Edition: San.
2031 AD. Upasakadasang - Translator, Editor - Dr. Jivraj Ghelabhai Doshy, Ahmedabad [Devanagari script,
Gujarati language]. 9. Upasakadasha Sutra - Editor, Translator - Bal-Brahmachari Pan. Shri Amolakrishiji Maharaj. Publisher
Hyderabad-Secunderabad Jain Sangh, Hyderabad [South]. Virabad 2442-2446 AD.
By comparing all these copies, an attempt has been made to obtain an error-free and authentic text by using the useful complementarity of different copies. In terms of serial number, paragraph, punctuation marks, etc.
[31] 

Page #35:
---------------------------
The division has been made with full attention to a well-organized presentation.
Prakrit was the living language of its time. In a living language, it is possible for a single word to have multiple pronunciations due to various local accents, such as 'nayar' and 'ṇayar' for the word 'nagar'. Both forms are found in ancient manuscripts. Thus, all words with multiple forms have been retained in the same form based on the authenticity of the available manuscripts.
Regarding the texts indicated by 'jav', the following order has been followed:
The text indicated by 'jav' has been given in brackets in its original form, first from the relevant supplementary Agam. Further, wherever the 'jav' indicating the same text appears, a footnote has been added referring to the previous sutra where that text is quoted.
In most published editions, the text indicated by 'jav' has not been quoted in brackets etc. This may have been done to avoid expansion. It is desirable to avoid excessive expansion, but it is also essential that the reader be aware of the description of the particular subject intended by 'jav'. Without presenting it, readers cannot gain complete knowledge of the subject matter. Therefore, the text indicated by 'jav' should not be completely ignored. However, it is certainly not desirable to give the text of the same 'jav' in all the places where it appears. This unnecessarily increases the bulk of the text. The text indicated by 'jav' becomes so extensive that readers find it difficult to follow the original text while reading.
The order of the language in the Hindi translation has been kept in such a way that even if the reader reads it independently without the original text, a similar flow is maintained.
At the beginning of each study, its essence has been given in brief, which includes a brief description of the subject of the study.
The topics discussed in the sutras that required special explanation have been given in the discussion. It has been ensured that the discussion is not unnecessarily lengthy and that essential points are not missed.
This is the outcome of the labor of eight months of continuous reading, editing, translating, and discussing the present Agam. During this time, I have continuously received inspiring guidance from the most revered Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muniji Maharaj and the venerable and knowledgeable sage, the learned Pandit Shobhachandji Bharill, which has greatly increased my enthusiasm. I am grateful from the heart.
From the beginning of this work, my literary colleague, the accomplished literary enthusiast Shri Shankarlalji Parikh, Ladnu, has been a collaborator until the completion of the work. He has been fully supportive in preparing the manuscripts for the press.
[32] 

Page #36:
---------------------------
A devotee of the Agam scriptures, interested in spirituality and self-control, a curious and learned person who is inquisitive about Indian life from millennia ago, if they benefit in any way from this present text, I will consider my labor worthwhile. 
:
Kailashdham,
Sardarshahar [Rajasthan] Date 9-4-80
-Dr. Chaganlal Shastri M.A. [Hindi Sanskrit, Prakrit and Jainology] Ph.D. Kavya Tirth, Vidya Mahodadhi Bh.P. Lecturer - - Institute of Prakrit, Jainology and Ahimsa, Vaishali [Bihar]
HO
卐
[33]
7. 

Page #37:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents
**Chapter One Title**

**Summary:** 2. Jambu's Curiosity: Sudharma's Answer
Anand Gathapati Vaibhava Social Prestige Shivananda Kollak Sannivesh Bhagwan Mahavir's Samavasaran Vandana by Anand Dharma-Deshana Anand's Reaction Vratagrahan [a] Ahimsa-vrat [b] Satya-vrat [c] Asteya-vrat [d] Swadar-Santosh [e] Ichcha-Pariman [f] Upbhog-Paribhog-Pariman [g] Anarth-Dand-Viraman
Atichaar [a] Samyaktva ke Atichaar [b] Ahimsa-vrat ke Atichaar [c] Satya-vrat ke Atichaar [d] Asteya-vrat ke Atichaar [e] Swadar-Santosh-vrat ke Atichaar [f] Ichcha-Pariman-vrat ke Atichaar [g] Digvrat ke Atichaar [h] Upbhog-Paribhog-Pariman-vrat ke Atichaar
3.
[34] 

Page #38:
---------------------------
[jh] Anarthadanda-viraman's excess [ ] Samayik-vrat's excess [t] Deshavakashik-vrat's excess [th] Poshadhopavas-vrat's excess [d] Yathasanvibhag-vrat's excess [dh] Marnanatik Sanlekhana's excess. Ananda by abhigraha Ananda's future Ananda: Avadhigyan
14.
Second Chapter
Summary: Briefly Shramanopasak Kamadeva Deva by Pisach as an upsarg Elephant as an upsarg Serpent as an upsarg Deva's defeat: Violence over non-violence's victory Bhagwan Mahavira's arrival: Kamadeva by vandan-naman Bhagwan by vardhapana Kamadeva: Swargarohan
100
102
107
108 110
Third Study
359
Summary: Briefly 2. Shramanopasak Chulnipita
- Upsargkari Deva: Pradurbhav   Son's death's threat
Chulnipita's fearlessness
Elder son's murder 7. Middle and younger son's murder
Mother's death's threat
Chulnipita's kshobh: Kolahal . Mother's arrival: Jijnasa
112 115 116 116 117 117 117 118 120
120
[35] 

Page #39:
---------------------------
## 12. 
## 11. The Culmination of the Penance Life of the Culmination Father through Worship
## 13. 

**N**

## 1. 
## 2. 
## 3. 
## 5. 
## 1. 
## 2. 
## 3. 
## 4. 
## 5. 
## 6. 
## 1. 
## 2. 
## 3. 
## 4. 
## 5. 
## 6. 
## 7. 
## 8. 
## 9. 
## 10. 

**Summary: In Brief**

* **Shramanopasaka Suradeva**
* **Murder of sons by Devas**
* **Threat of terrible diseases**
* **Suradeva's distress**
* **Conclusion of life**

**Summary: In Brief**

* **Shramanopasaka Chullashataka**
* **Devas' request**
* **Threat of destruction of wealth**
* **Deviation: Penance**
* **Divine motion**

**Summary: In Brief**

* **Shramanopasaka Kundakaulika**
* **Meditation in Ashoka Garden**
* **Devas' proposition of determinism**
* **Kundakaulika's question**
* **Devas' answer**
* **Kundakaulika's refutation**
* **Devas' defeat**

**Fourth Study**
**Fifth Study**
**Sixth Study**

* **Praise of Kundakaulika by the Lord: Inspiration for Shraman-Nirgranthas**
* **Peaceful death**

**[36]**

**121**
**123**
**125**
**126**
**128**
**128**
**129**
**130**
**131**
**133**
**135**
**135**
**136**
**137**
**138**
**139**
**x x x x x x x x x x**
**142**
**143**
**148** 

Page #40:
---------------------------
Seventh Study
149
153
154 155 159 160 161 162
162
Summary: In brief, the Ajivika Sakdalputra, wealth: profession, information by the Dev, Sakdalputra's imagination, the presence of Bhagwan Mahavira, the effect on Sakdalputra, Bhagwan's arrival in the potter's house, discussion on determinism, enlightenment
Sakdalputra and Agni Mitra's acceptance of vows 12. Bhagwan's departure
Arrival of Goshalak 14. Neglect by Sakdalputra
Goshalak's praise of Bhagwan's group
Goshalak's arrival in the potter's house 17. Disappointing journey 18. Divine affliction 19. Inner purification: worship: end
164
11.
165
169 169
13.
170
15.
170
6.
176 177 177 179
Eighth Study
181 185 188
188
359
Summary: In brief, the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak, wives: their wealth, Mahashatak's practice of vows, Revati's greed, Revati's fondness for meat and alcohol, Mahashatak: towards spirituality, Revati's sensual attempt to distract Mahashatak, Mahashatak's increasing practice, death by fasting
189 190
192
193
9.
194 194
[37] 

Page #41:
---------------------------
194
11. Emergence of Avadhijnana 12. Revati's Repeated Unsuccessful Attempts 13. MahaShataka's Prediction of Revati's Downfall 14. Revati's Sorrowful End 15. Gautam's Inspirational Message to the Lord 16. MahaShataka's Atonement
195 195 197 197
200
Ninth Study
Summary: Brief Gaathapati Nandini's Father Vrata-Aradhana Sadhana-filled Life: Demise
203
204
Tenth Study
Summary: Brief Gaathapati Salihi's Father Successful Sadhana Conclusion Collection-Gaathaas Appendix 1: Word List Appendix 2: Used-Text-List
205 206 206 208 209
214
240
[38] 

Page #42:
---------------------------
Panchamagana-Sirisuhammsami-viraiyam Sattamam Angam
Uvasagadasao

Panchamagana-Srimatsudharmaswami-viracitam Saptamam Angam
Upasakadasha 

Page #43:
---------------------------
The five great vows (Mahavratas) are:
1. **Ahimsa** (non-violence)
2. **Satya** (truthfulness)
3. **Asteya** (non-stealing)
4. **Brahmacharya** (continence)
5. **Aparigraha** (non-attachment) 

Page #44:
---------------------------
## The Upasakadasanga Sutra
## First Study
## Summary

This event took place during the time when Lord Mahavira was physically present, spreading spirituality through his teachings. In a part of North Bihar, where the Lichchhavi republic was located, there was a city called Vanijyagram. It was near the Lichchhavi capital, Vaishali. Even today, a village called "Baniya-Gaon" exists in that region. It is likely a remnant of Vanijyagram.

In Vanijyagram, a righteous householder named Anand resided. He was very wealthy, prosperous, and opulent. In Jain scriptures, the term "Gaathapati" is used for such individuals. Anand possessed immense wealth, including crores of gold coins, riches, money, grain, land, and cattle. Based on today's valuation, he would be considered a billionaire. Agriculture was his primary occupation. He had four cattle farms, each with ten thousand cows.

Gaathapati Anand, besides being prosperous, was highly respected in society and honored by people from all walks of life. He was intelligent, skilled in social interactions, and sociable. Therefore, people sought his advice in their matters. Everyone had immense faith in him, and no one hesitated to reveal their secrets to him. Thus, he lived a life of happiness, prosperity, wealth, and prestige.

His wife's name was Shivananda. She was beautiful, virtuous, and devoted to her husband. She had immense love, devotion, and dedication towards him. Anand's family members were also prosperous and happy. Everyone respected and honored Anand.

A new turn came in Anand's life. By chance, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Vanijyagram during his foot journey. The king of that place, Jitashatru, went to see the Bhagwan with his ministers, officials, and family members. Other prominent citizens and devout people also arrived. Anand also came to know about this. He felt a desire to see the Bhagwan. He went to the Koollaka Sannivesh, where the Bhagwan was seated, located in the suburb of Vanijyagram. Anand respectfully bowed to the Bhagwan.

The Bhagwan gave his teachings. He imparted knowledge about the principles of Jiva, Ajeeva, etc., and explained the path of the Asanga Shraman Dharma and the Agaar Grihi Dharma or Shravak Dharma.

Anand was impressed. He requested the Bhagwan to teach him the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata - the twelve vows of a Shravak. 

Page #45:
---------------------------
## The Upasakadasanga Sutra

The Upasakadasanga Sutra was accepted. Until now, life had been unrestrained in terms of violence, indulgence, and attachment. He made it restrained and limited. He regulated and controlled his boundless desires and cravings. As a result, his food, clothing, and enjoyment of pleasures all became much more limited and simple than before. Anand was a wise and determined man. He readily enjoyed this simple, straightforward, and self-controlled life.

Anand thought, "I have gained enlightenment in life and have molded my conduct accordingly. It would be good if my wife, Shivananda, would do the same." He came home and said to his wife, "Devanupriye! You too should see the Lord, worship him. It would be very good if you accept the householder's dharma."

Anand understood the value of individual freedom, so he did not pressure his wife, only requesting her.

Shivananda liked her husband's request. She went to the service of Lord Mahavira and listened to the dharma. With great faith and enthusiasm, she accepted the Shravaka vows. After some time, Lord Mahavira left from there.

Anand's life was now even more peaceful. He continued to work with devotion to the dharma. Fourteen years passed. One day, Anand was sleeping. His sleep was broken in the last watch of the night. Thinking about the dharma, he began to think, "In the social situation I am in, I am connected to many distinguished people, and I cannot devote enough time to the worship of the dharma. It would be good if I were to free myself from social and worldly responsibilities and devote my life more and more to the worship of the dharma." His thought turned into a decision. The next day, he organized a feast. He invited all his family members, fed them, and honored them. He revealed his decision to everyone. He entrusted the burden of his family to his elder brother, taught him how to fulfill his social responsibilities and relationships properly. He specifically told those present that they should not ask him for anything related to household matters. Thus, Anand happily separated himself from family and social life. He became eager to live a life like a monk.

Anand began to worship the dharma in the Poshadshala located in the Kollak Sannivesh. He gradually worshipped the eleven images of the Shravaka with the utmost purity and devotion. Due to his intense, austere life, his body became thin, to the point that the veins of his body became visible.

One day, in the last watch of the night, while thinking about the dharma, Anand thought, "Although I still have no lack of self-strength, courage, faith, and emotion, I have become weak and emaciated physically. It is best for me to accept the final, fatal Sanlekhana in the presence of Lord Mahavira. I will give up food and water for the rest of my life, and without desiring death, I will spend my last days with a peaceful mind."

Anand was a resolute man. Whatever he thought, it was with wisdom and the call of his soul. He did not delay in turning it into action. As he had thought, as soon as morning came, he began the Amaran... 

Page #46:
---------------------------
## First Study: Summary

[Ananda] accepted [the] fast. He rose above all kinds of desires and attractions of worldly life. He became past the desire for both life and death and became absorbed in self-reflection. 
Due to the auspicious and bright results of joy in the profound contemplation and worship of religion, the karma of [avadhijnana] was destroyed, he gained [avadhijnana].

The Lord Mahavira arrived while traveling, he stayed in the Duutipaalasha Chaitya outside the commercial town. People started to gain religious benefit. The Lord's chief disciple Gautam was then continuously doing penance day and night. One day he went to the commercial town for alms. When he reached near the Koollaka Sannivesha, he heard about Ananda's joyful fast unto death. He thought, "It would be good if I go there." He came to the dining hall near Ananda. Ananda's body had become very weak. It was not possible for him to move around from his place. He requested Aryagautam to come near him so that he could properly pay his respects. Gautam came near. Ananda paid his respects with devotion and also asked a question - "Bhanta! Can a householder gain [avadhijnana]?" Gautam said, "Ananda! It is possible." Then Ananda said, "Bhagavan! I am in the role of a householder-disciple, I have also gained [avadhijnana]. Through it, I know and see up to five hundred yojanas towards the east in the salt sea and down to the Loloupachyuta Naraka in the lower world." On this, Gautam said, "Ananda! A householder can gain [avadhijnana], but not so vast. You have spoken untruth, criticize yourself, do penance."

Ananda said, "Bhagavan! Is there criticism even for the Jina-preachings and for the true meanings?" Gautam said, "Ananda! That does not happen." Then Ananda said, "Bhagavan! If there is no criticism of truth and true meanings in the Jina-preachings, then you criticize in this regard. That is, what I have said is not untrue." Gautam was lost in thought. He decided to ask the Lord about this. He went to the Lord. He told him the whole story and asked who is the one who should criticize and do penance?

The Lord said, "Gautam! You criticize and also seek forgiveness from Ananda. Ananda has spoken correctly."

Gautam was a pure and simple-minded seeker. He accepted the Lord Mahavira's statement with humility and with a simple heart, he criticized his fault and sought forgiveness from Ananda.

Ananda became increasingly firm and firmer in his bright self-results. After one month of [sanlekhana], he attained [samadhi-maran]. After leaving his body, he was born in the form of a god in the Arun Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the Soudharmavatansaka Maha Vimana of the Soudharma Devaloka.

This is the brief summary of the first study. 

Page #47:
---------------------------
## First Study
**The Curiosity of Gaathapaati Aanand Jamboo: Sudharma's Answer**

1. **Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam**
Champa naam nayari hottha. Vaṇṇao.
Puṇṇabhaddhe cheie. Vaṇṇao.

**Translation:**
In that time, in that era, there was a city named Champa. (It is described in the Aupapatik Sutra). There was a Chaitya named Puṇṇabhaddhe. (It is also described in the Aupapatik Sutra).

**Explanation:**
Here, the words "kaal" (time) and "samay" (era) are used. While they are often synonyms, in Jain terminology, there is a difference. "Kaal" refers to general time, while "samay" refers to the smallest unit of time. However, here, they are not used with this distinction. This is a characteristic of the descriptive style of Jain Agamas, where the same thing is often said using many synonyms, synonymous words, or words with similar meanings. This helps to clearly express the meaning and presents a very clear word-picture of an event, story, or situation to the readers. Here, "kaal" refers to the end of the fourth Ara of the present Avasarpini, and "samay" refers to the era or time when Arya Sudharma existed.

Here, the city of Champa and the Chaitya Parṇabhaddhe are mentioned. The word "Vaṇṇao" is used after both. In Jain Agamas, there is an accepted way of describing common subjects like cities, villages, gardens, etc. For example, the general order of describing a city applies to all cities. The same is true for others.

Before being written down, Jain Agamas were memorized through oral tradition. This style was probably adopted for ease of memorization. Also, cities, gardens, etc., are generally quite similar.

122. **Teṇam kāleṇam teṇam samaeṇam aj-suhamme samosarie, jaav jamboo samaṇassa bhagavao mahavirass antevaasi aj-suhamme naam there jaati-sampanne, kul-sampanne, ruv**

**Translation:**
In that time, in that era, Aj-Suhamme was a Samosari, until Jamboo, the last of the great Tirthankara Mahavira, Aj-Suhamme was a Thera, born into a noble family, well-born, handsome... 

Page #48:
---------------------------


Page #49:
---------------------------
8]
(The Upasakadasangasutra, by the Nan-Dasan-Dharena, the Viyadrichoumena, the Jina, the Janaena, the Buddha, the Bohaena, the Muttena, the Moyagena, the Tinnaena, the Taraena, the Siva-Mayala-Maruya-Mananta-Makkhaya-Mavvabaham-Punaravattayam, the Sasayam, the Thanamuva-gaena, the Siddhi-Gai-Namadhenam, the Thanam) by the Sampattenam.
_ Of the sixth Anga, the Nayadhammakahana, this is the Pannatte, of the seventh, O Venerable! Anga, the Uvasagadasana, by the Samana, as far as the Sampattenam, what is the Pannatte?
Thus, O Jambu! By the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira, as far as the Sampattenam, of the seventh Anga, the Uvasagadasana, ten Ajjanas are Pannatta. Thus,
Anande Kamadeve ya, Gahava-i-Chulani-piya. Suradeve Chullasaye, Gahava-i-Kundakolie. Saddal-pute Mahasaye, Nandini-piya Salihi-piya.
O Jina, Venerable! By the Samana, as far as the Sampattenam, of the seventh Anga, the Uvasagadasana, ten Ajjanas are Pannatta, of the first, O Venerable! By the Samana, as far as the Sampattenam, what is the Pannatte?
At that time, Arya Sudharma (the attendant of the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. Born into a noble family, with a pure maternal lineage, born into a noble family, with a pure paternal lineage, possessing strength, with excellent physical strength, possessing beauty, handsome, with a beautiful body, possessing humility, possessing knowledge, possessing vision, possessing character, possessing shame, possessing lightness, light, free from the burden of material things and kshaya, etc., radiant, luminous, eloquent, with a good voice or powerful, with power or influence, successful, victorious over anger, victorious over pride, victorious over deceit, victorious over greed, victorious over sleep, victorious over the senses, victorious over endurance, victorious over suffering, free from the desire for life and the fear of death, devoted to austerity, possessing virtues, with special qualities like restraint, etc., possessing actions, with special qualities like purity of food, etc., possessing character, with excellent character, possessing the ten virtues of a Yati, possessing restraint, a suppressor of enemies like attachment, etc., possessing certainty, a firm believer in the truth or confident in the certainty of karma-phala, possessing simplicity, possessing gentleness, possessing lightness, free from any burden due to self-absorption or spirited, possessing peace, forgiving, possessing secrecy, a protector of mental, verbal, and physical activities, using them wisely, possessing liberation, free from desires or progressing towards liberation, possessing knowledge, a master of various branches of knowledge, possessing mantras, with true mantras, contemplation or thought, possessing celibacy, possessing Vedas, a knower of the Vedas and other worldly and transcendental scriptures, possessing Nayas, a knower of Nayas like Naigama, etc., possessing rules, a follower of rules, possessing truth, possessing purity, with spiritual purity or holiness, possessing knowledge, a practitioner of knowledge, possessing vision, with the special quality of Kshayika Samyaktva, possessing character, engaged in the observance of character, strong, 1-2-3-4, in accordance with what has been described in this Sutra). 

Page #50:
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Ananda

[9] Powerful in practice, endowed with extraordinary power, possessing the highest virtues, requiring extraordinary power to hold, the holder of such virtues, a great ascetic, a practitioner of intense austerities, a great celibate, a keeper of strict celibacy, with a body devoid of physical adornment, possessing vast brilliance within, a holder of fourteen previous knowledges, a sage, Ary Sudharma, endowed with four kinds of knowledge: Shruta, Avadhi, and Manahparyaya, surrounded by five hundred Shramanas, moving forward in a sequential order, from one village to another, enjoying a pleasant journey, arrived where the city of Champa was, where the Purnabhadra Chaitya was. The Purnabhadra Chaitya was outside the city of Champa, where the Lord, in accordance with the appropriate and proper conduct of a sage, took up residence and stayed, cultivating the soul with restraint and austerity.

At that time, Ary Sudharma's eldest attendant, Ary Jambu, an unmarried man, born in the Kashyap gotra, whose body was seven hands tall, who possessed a body with four limbs in perfect harmony, with proportionate limbs, balanced and coordinated structure, who possessed a unique body structure with strong bone ligaments like a vajra, a rishabha, and a naraacha, who was golden in color like a lotus, with the glow of a gold line marked on a touchstone, who was a great ascetic, who was like fire in burning away intense ascetic deeds, who was a heated ascetic, whose body bore the intense glow of austerity, who was a great ascetic, powerful, intense, possessing intense virtues, a great ascetic, a great celibate, with a body devoid of adornment and possessing vast brilliance, stood not too far, not too close to the sage Ary Sudharma. He raised his knees, lowered his head, and stood in a meditative posture, cultivating the soul with restraint and austerity.

Then, a desire arose in the mind of Ary Jambu, an unmarried man, with faith, doubt arose in the sense of uncertainty, doubt, and curiosity. Again, a feeling of faith arose in his mind, doubt arose, curiosity arose. He got up, went to where the sage Ary Sudharma was, and came. Arriving there, he circumambulated the sage Ary Sudharma three times, offering salutations and prostrations. Having done so, he stood not too close, not too far from the Lord, with a desire to listen, offering salutations, with folded hands in humility, seeking his guidance, and said, "O Lord! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira [who, upon attaining omniscience, first initiated the Shruta-dharma, the founder of the fourfold dharma-tirtha of Tirthankara-Shraman-Shramani-Shravaka-Shravika, self-enlightened, attaining enlightenment without any external cause or help, endowed with unique super-powers, therefore the best of men, the lion among men due to his abundance of courage, the best of men, like a white lotus, free from all impurities, like the best of elephants, the best of the world, the lord of the world, the one who moves against the flow of the world, on the path of spirituality, or the light of the world, the one who spreads the light of dharma in the world, the one who gives fearlessness, the one who gives refuge, the one who opens the inner eye, the one who shows the path, the one who gives restraint-life and enlightenment, the one who gives dharma, the one who preaches dharma, 


Page #51:
---------------------------
[10] I have heard the meaning of the sixth Anga, Nayadhammakhao, as explained. What meaning did the Lord explain in the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha?

Arya Sudharma said, "Jambhu! The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira explained ten studies in the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha, which are as follows:

1. Anand, 2. Kamadeva, 3. Gathapati Chulnipita, 4. Suradeva, 5. Chullashatak, 6. Gathapati Kundakaulik, 7. Saddalputra, 8. Mahashatak, 9. Nandinipita, 10. Shalihipita.

Jambhu then asked, "Bhagwan! What meaning did Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira explain in the first study of the ten studies he explained in the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha?"

For general description, Jain Agamas use 'Vannao' to indicate, which takes the required context mentioned elsewhere to the present place. Similarly, Jain Agamas also have the practice of indicating with the word 'Jao' for descriptive description, expansion, etc. The related description is taken from other Agamas where it has come. Here, the descriptive descriptions of Bhagwan Mahavira, Sudharma and Jambhu are indicated by the word 'Jao'. These descriptive descriptions have been estimated here from Jnatridharmkatha, Aupapatik and Rajaprashriya Sutra. As indicated earlier, this style may have been accepted for the convenience of the memorized tradition of Jain Agamas.

Anand Gathapati

3. And Jambhu! At that time, at that time, there was a city named Vanijagama. Vannao. There was a Cheiya named Duipalasaya in the north-east direction of that Vanijagama. There was a king named Jiyasattu in that Vanijagama city. Vannao. In that Vanijagama, there was a Gathapati named Anand, who lived in a house with all the comforts (given, wealth, scattered-wide-building-bed-seat-knowledge-vehicle, many-wealth-wife-son-wealth, coming-going-equipped, scattered-city-food-drink, many... 

Page #52:
---------------------------
##  [11
**First Study: The Story of Anand**]  A wealthy householder, Anand, was highly respected and admired by all. 
  The wise Sudharma said, "Jambū! In the fourth Āra of the present Avasarpini, at the time when Lord Mahāvīra was present, there was a city called Vāṇijyagrāma.  Outside the city, in the north-east direction - the Iśāna corner - was a shrine called Dūtīpālaśa.  The king of that place was called Jitasatru.  In Vāṇijyagrāma, there lived a wealthy householder named Anand.  Anand was a wealthy man, [radiant, brilliant, influential, prosperous, with a magnificent house, luxurious bedding, comfortable seating, carts and vehicles for transporting goods, and an abundance of gold, silver, and coins.  He was engaged in the proper use and application of wealth, diligently involved in earning money through business and trade.  Even after his meals, there was always plenty of food and drink left over.  His house was filled with many servants, maids, cows, bulls, calves, sheep, and goats.  He was so powerful that no one dared to disrespect or insult him.  
**Discussion**
• The term Gāhāvai [Gāthāpati] in this context is particularly noteworthy.  It is used primarily in Jain literature.  It is formed by combining the two words Gāhā + Vai.  In Prakrit, 'Gāhā' refers to both the Āryā metre and the meaning of 'house'.  One meaning is also 'praise'.  Due to being worthy of great praise because of wealth, grain, prosperity, and splendor, commentators have used this term for a wealthy, prosperous householder.  However, the more appropriate meaning of Gāhā seems to be 'house'.
This passage reveals that agriculture and cattle-raising were considered highly esteemed activities at that time.  Wealthy householders embraced them with enthusiasm.  
**Splendor**
4.  Tass ṇam Ānandass Gāhāvaiss Chaṭṭāri Hiraṇṇa-Koḍīo Nihaṇa-Pauṭṭāo, Chaṭṭāri Hiraṇṇa-Koḍīo Vuḍḍi-Pauṭṭāo; Chaṭṭāri Hiraṇṇa-Koḍīo Pavitthar-Pauṭṭāo, Chaṭṭāri Vaya, Dasagosa-Hassiēṇam Vaēṇam Hotthā.
Anand Gāthāpati had four crore gold coins kept in his treasury, four crore gold coins invested in business, four crore gold coins invested in the splendor of his house, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, and other resources.  He had four herds of cattle.  Each herd had ten thousand cows.
**Discussion**
The term Hiraṇṇa [Hiraṇya] used here refers to the gold coins that were in circulation at that time.  The use of gold coins in this country dates back to ancient times.  Lord 

Page #53:
---------------------------
[12]
Even after the time of Mahavira, gold coins continued to circulate in India. The gold coin that foreign rulers introduced in India was called a dinar. The word 'dinar' was accepted as it is in the Sanskrit language. The gold coin that was circulated during the reign of Muslim emperors was called a mohar or asharfi. After that, the circulation of gold coins ceased in India. Social Prestige
5. Anand was a person who was consulted by many kings, rulers, powerful and influential men [sword-wielding, respected citizens, landowning landlords, heads of large families, wealthy and influential merchants, commanders of armies] and merchants who traveled to distant lands with many small traders. He was consulted in many matters, causes, deliberations, family problems, confidential matters, private matters, decisions, and interactions. He was the center of the family, the standard, the foundation, the support, the eye, the guide, the foundation [the standard, the foundation, the support, the eye], and the enhancer of all work. Discussion
The words 'sword' etc. used here reveal the form of the distinguished people of that time. This characteristic was related to different areas. These words indicate all those economic, commercial, administrative, practical and public relations characteristics that were important and respected in the society of that time. This passage clearly introduces Anand's broad, influential and respectable personality. He was such a generous, serious and high-minded person that all kinds of distinguished people considered it appropriate to consult him in their work and seek his advice.
Another important point in this passage is that it sheds light on the unity, mutual loyalty and harmony of Anand's family life. Anand was the center of the whole family and was eager for the development and prosperity of the family. The metaphor of the 'meḍhi' for Anand is very important here. 

Page #54:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Anand

[13]
The "medhi" is the wooden post that is planted in the center of the threshing floor. The oxen are tied to it and made to go around, separating the grain. The oxen are kept moving by it. This was the situation of Anand in his family.
Shivananda
6. Anand, the story-teller, had a wife named Shivananda. Her five senses were perfect, complete, and capable in their respective fields. She had auspicious signs on her hands, like lines, and marks like moles, which indicated good fortune and beauty. She was also endowed with good qualities, character, and virtue. She was perfect in her physical proportions, weight, height, and was beautiful in every way. Her form was as gentle as the moon, and her appearance was captivating. She was a beautiful woman. She was the beloved of Anand, the story-teller. She was devoted to him, full of love, and never became estranged or indifferent, even when he was against her. She enjoyed the five worldly pleasures with him: sound, touch, taste, form, and smell.
**Discussion**
This passage beautifully depicts the ideal woman, combining beauty and virtue. This is the essence of a woman's perfection.
**Here, the adjective "aviratta" indicates the wife's dedication to her husband and the noble character of women.**
**Kollāka Settlement**
7. To the north-east of his trading town, there was a settlement called Kollāka. It was prosperous and stable, with many people, both young and old, and a large population. It had many houses, cattle, and fields. It was a place of great wealth and prosperity. 

Page #55:
---------------------------
[14]
Kollaka, a suburb located in the northeast direction, in the *Ishan* corner, outside the commercial town, was a prosperous, secure, and wealthy settlement. The citizens of Kollaka, along with people from other parts of the region, found joy and entertainment in its abundance of recreational facilities. The population was dense, with hundreds and thousands of plows tilling the surrounding land, creating a naturally beautiful boundary. There were numerous flocks of roosters and young bulls, and the surrounding land was lush with sugarcane, barley, and rice plants. Cows, buffaloes, and sheep were plentiful. The area was adorned with beautiful, intricately crafted *chaityas* and various groups of young women, creating a vibrant atmosphere. It was free from bribe-takers, extortionists, robbers, thieves, border guards, and toll collectors, making it peaceful, tranquil, and free from disturbances. Monks received alms generously, ensuring a comfortable and secure living for everyone. Despite the dense population of various families and households, the area remained peaceful. It was frequented by various performers, including actors, dancers, acrobats, wrestlers, boxers, jesters, storytellers, swimmers, singers of heroic tales and *rasas*, fortune tellers, performers using bamboo sticks, puppeteers, musicians playing *tūṇ* instruments, *tumbī* players, and *tālacara* performers. The area was also adorned with recreational gardens, parks, wells, ponds, and small dams, resembling a *nandana vana*. It was protected by a deep, wide, and high ditch, and fortified with various defensive structures like *chakra*, *gada*, *bhasandi*, *gofia*, *avarodha*, *antaraprakara*, and *shathadhni*. The area was also surrounded by a strong inner wall, resembling a *parakota*, to prevent enemy forces from entering. The area was further protected by a circular wall, built with strong bricks, and adorned with beautiful gates, towers, and arches, leading to a well-maintained royal road. The area was also protected by strong, well-maintained *indakila* (a type of defensive structure), and was a hub for various merchants, artisans, and traders, creating a vibrant commercial atmosphere. The area was also adorned with *singhaḍaga* (a type of decorative structure), *tiga* (a type of decorative structure), *chaukka* (a type of decorative structure), *caccara* (a type of decorative structure), *paṇiyāvaṇa* (a type of market), and various other commercial establishments, creating a bustling marketplace. The area was also frequented by gods, humans, and celestial beings, and was home to numerous forests, horses, intoxicated elephants, and various other animals, creating a vibrant and diverse ecosystem. The area was also adorned with beautiful, clear water, reflecting the surrounding beauty, and was further enhanced by the presence of *pandaravara* (a type of decorative structure), creating a visually stunning landscape. The area was a place of joy, beauty, and wonder, attracting visitors from far and wide. 

Page #56:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Anand

[15 This great rock, upon whose fall hundreds of people would be crushed to death, and which was surrounded by a crooked rampart like a bow, with a double door that had no gaps and was difficult to enter, was adorned with lion-headed capitals built in a round shape. Its highways, shelters built on top of the rampart, watchtowers, eight-hand-wide paths built in the middle of the rampart, small doors and windows built in the rampart, gopuras (tower gateways), city gates, toranas (triumphal arches) were all well-decorated and divided. The pointed spear-like nails fixed in front of the doors of the Argala and Indra-keel gopuras were made by skilled artisans and expert craftsmen. It was comfortable due to the market, the trading area, the bazaar, and the presence of many artisans and craftsmen. It was beautiful and charming due to the triangular spaces, crossroads, squares, places where more than four roads meet, shops selling utensils and other things, and many types of goods. Due to the king's procession, the highways were always crowded. There was a gathering of many fine horses, intoxicated elephants, chariots, palanquins with curtains, syandamanika (palanquins carried by men), vehicles, and the famous two-hand-long and wide doli-like vehicles of the Goll country. There were water bodies adorned with blooming lotuses, and it was decorated with fine white buildings. It was worth seeing with unblinking eyes due to its extreme beauty, pleasing to the mind, worth seeing, beautiful, captivating the mind, and dwelling in the mind.]

8. There, in the Kollar settlement, Anand the story-teller lived with many friends, relatives, people of the same caste with similar conduct and thoughts, his own family, relatives, friends, and associates, including his father-in-law, maternal uncle, and servants. They were all prosperous and happy.

9. At that time, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, the Jina, the Knower, the Conqueror, the Self-Enlightened, the Supreme Man, the Lion of Men, the Lotus of Men, the Elephant of Men, the Fearless, the Eye of the World, the Path of the World, the Refuge of the World, the Life of the World, the Light of the World, the Refuge of the World, the Teacher of the World, the Dharma-Wheel-Turning King, the Unhindered, the Knower of the Truth, the Destroyer of Illusions, the Liberator, the Knower, the Liberator, the Awakened, the Enlightened, the All-Knowing, the All-Seeing, the Perfect, the Immortal, the Unchanging, the Eternal, the Unborn, the Uncreated, the Unending, the One who has attained the state of Siddhi, the one who has attained the state of Nirvana, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained the state of Liberation, the one who has attained
Page #57:
---------------------------
[16]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
Possessing the qualities of a perfected being, with a body free from blemishes, like the fragrance of a lotus flower, with a breath that is sweet-smelling, with a radiant complexion, with a body that is pure and free from impurities, with a body that is like a well-polished gem, with a body that is like a cloudless sky, with a body that is like a well-constructed building, with a body that is like a mountain peak, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower, with a body that is like a well-formed lotus flower,
Page #58:
---------------------------
**First Study: The Story of the King of Songs**

[17 - The young sun's rays, like a deep, dark navel, shone brightly. The shining, golden, mirror-like, dust-particle-like, sharp, wind-like, large, middle-sized, and small, like a lion's mane, like a horse's mane, in the land of the Gujjar, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclothed, the unclo
Page #59:
---------------------------
[18]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Pajjuvasai.
At that time, the Shraman, engaged in intense austerities and practices, the Lord, endowed with spiritual wealth, Mahavira, was moving steadfastly on the path of practice amidst disturbances and obstacles, [Adikara, the first propagator of Dharma in his era, the Tirthankara, the establisher of the fourfold Dharma-Tirtha-Dharma-Sangha, consisting of Sadhus, Sadhvis, Shravakas, and Shravikas, self-enlightened, self-realized without any other cause, Purushottama, the best among men, Purusha-Simha, a lion among men in terms of self-courage, Purushavara-Pundarika, like a lotus, detached and free from attachment while living among humans, Purushavara-Gandhasti, the best among men, like a Gandhasti, just as ordinary elephants flee at the approach of a Gandhasti, similarly, upon his entry into a region, calamities like famine, epidemics, etc., were dispelled, i.e., possessing an extraordinary and influential personality, Abhayapradak, providing fearlessness to all beings, completely non-violent, not causing fear to anyone, Chakshu-Pradak, bestowing inner vision and true knowledge, Marg-Pradak, the revealer of the path of practice, consisting of right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, Sharanaprad, a refuge for the inquisitive and the liberated, Jeevanaprad, the strength of spiritual life, Deepak-sadrish, illuminating all things like a lamp, or an island of refuge for those wandering in the ocean of existence, a refuge, a guide, and a foundation for beings, like the ruler of the earth with four boundaries, the Chakravarti of the religious world, Pratighat-badha, free from obstacles or coverings, possessing supreme knowledge, faith, etc., Vyavritta-chhadma, free from the coverings of ignorance, etc., Jita, having conquered past attachments, etc., Jnayak, the knower of emotional attachments, or Jnapak, the one who shows the path to conquer attachment, Tirna, having crossed the ocean of existence, Tarak, the one who ferries others across the ocean of existence, Mukta, free from external and internal bonds, Mochak, the one who liberates others, Budd, having attained the knowledge of the knowable, Bodhak, the one who enlightens others, Sarvajña, omniscient, Sarvadarshi, all-seeing, Shiva, auspicious, Achal, stable, free from disturbances, Antarhit, vanished, Kshayarhit, free from decay, Aparavartan, where there is no return to the cycle of birth and death, Sampravritta, inclined towards attaining the state of Siddha-gati, the state of Siddha, Arhat, worthy of worship, Ragad-vijeta, the conqueror of attachments, Jin, possessing perfect knowledge, Kevali, possessing perfect knowledge, seven cubits tall, Sama-chauras-sansthan-sansthit, with a square body, Vajra-rishabha-naraacha-sanhanan, with strong bones, Deha-antarvarti-pavan, with the proper speed and movement of the internal wind, Kank-pakshi, with a flawless anus like a crane, Kabutar, with the digestive power of a pigeon, his apan-sthan was as pure as a bird's, his back, sides, and loins were well-developed, beautiful, and well-proportioned, his mouth was fragrant with the breath of a lotus or a fragrant substance called padma, and a blue lotus or a fragrant substance called utpala-kustha, his complexion was excellent, his skin was excellent, he was healthy, excellent, spacious, with very white flesh, his body was free from dirt, which was difficult to remove, his body was free from dirt, which was easy to remove, his body was free from blemishes, spots, sweat, and dirt, therefore, he was extremely pure, his every limb was radiant, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of a mountain, with dense, well-connected nerves, his head was high like the peak of
Page #60:
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Anand]
[19
Their hair, as soft as threads emerging from a flower bud, bright, abundant, fine, smooth, fragrant, beautiful, reaching the shoulders, sapphire blue, indigo blue, and jet black, was like a swarm of happy, well-nourished bees, shining brightly on their head. The skin on which their hair grew was radiant like pomegranate blossoms and gold, red, pure, and smooth. Their upper head, the most excellent part, was dense, full, and umbrella-shaped. Their forehead was free from any marks of boils, pimples, or wounds, smooth, beautiful, and pure, resembling a magnificent half-moon. Their face was gentle like a full moon. Their ears were beautifully joined with their face, with the proper shape and proportions, making them look very beautiful. Their cheeks were fleshy and well-nourished. Their eyebrows were beautifully arched like a slightly drawn bow, thin like a line of black clouds, black, and smooth. Their eyes were like blooming white lotuses. Their eyes were developed like lotus petals, white, and adorned with eyelashes. Their nose was long, straight, and elevated, like the beak of a Garuda. Their lips were like a polished coral band or a bimba fruit. Their teeth were like pieces of a spotless moon, purer than the purest conch shell, cow's milk, foam, kunda flower, water drops, and lotus stalk, white. Their teeth were unbroken, complete, unblemished, strong, free from cracks, continuous, close together, smooth, shining, well-formed, and beautiful. Their many teeth appeared as one row of teeth. Their tongue and palate were red like gold heated in fire and washed with water. Their beard and mustache were never growing, well-divided, very light, and possessed an extraordinary beauty. Their chin was fleshy, well-formed, strong, broad, and wide like a cheetah. Their neck was four finger-breadths wide, with three folds, and elevated like a fine conch shell. Their shoulders were full and broad, like those of a strong buffalo, pig, lion, cheetah, bull, and a fine elephant. Their arms were round and long, strong, pleasing to look at, with strong wrists, well-joined, harmonious, distinct, thick, solid, stable, properly bound with tendons, and round like the city gate. Their long arms were like the outstretched body of a Naga king, ready to obtain the desired object. Their hands, from the wrist down, were elevated, soft, fleshy, and well-formed. They were marked with auspicious signs. When their fingers were joined, no gaps were visible. Their palms were reddish. Their fingers were strong and soft. Their nails were slightly reddish like copper, thin, white, pleasing to look at, smooth, and soft. Their palms had auspicious lines of the moon, sun, conch, wheel, and clockwise swastika. Their chest was bright like the surface of a golden rock, broad, flat, properly fleshy, wide, and vast. It bore the mark of the Srivatsa swastika. Due to the fleshiness or fullness of their body, their spine was not visible. Their body was radiant like gold, pure, beautiful, free from blemishes, and free from disease and defects. It possessed all 1008 marks of a perfect man. The sides of their body... 

Page #61:
---------------------------
[20]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
The ascetics were slender towards the bottom, gradually narrowing, proportionate to their bodies, beautiful, well-developed, with a pleasing amount of flesh, their chests and abdomens were straight, even, joined together, of excellent quality, fine, light, black, smooth, desirable, excellent, graceful, charming hair, their flanks below the abdomen on both sides were well-formed, well-developed, beautiful, like fish and birds, their abdomen was like a fish, their abdominal organ, the group of intestines, was pure, clean, and clear, their navel was like a lotus, prominent, deep, round like the whirlpool of the Ganges, swirling like waves on the right side, beautiful, shining, like a lotus blooming with the rays of the sun, and the middle part of their body was like the middle part of a trikaṣṭhika, a pestle, and a mirror handle, like the hilt of a sword, and like a fine vajra, round and thin, their waist was round, like the waist of a healthy, excellent horse and an excellent lion, free from diseases, sorrows, etc., their private parts were like the well-developed private parts of an excellent horse, their bodies were free from the need to excrete feces and urine, like a horse of the best breed, their gait was like that of an excellent elephant, with strength and gravity, their thighs were well-formed, like the trunk of an elephant, their knees were hidden, like the lid of a box, not protruding due to fleshiness, their shins were round, like the shins of a deer, ruby grass, and a ball of spun thread, with a gradual slope, their ankles were beautiful, well-formed, and hidden, their feet were well-established, beautifully formed, and seemed pleasing because they were raised like a tortoise, their toes were small and large in proportion, joined together in a beautiful way, their nails were prominent, thin, red like copper, smooth and oily, their soles were soft, delicate, and tender, like the petals of a red lotus, their bodies displayed the 1008 marks of excellent men, their feet were marked with excellent signs and auspicious swastika marks, in the form of mountains, cities, crocodiles, oceans, and wheels, their appearance was unique and extraordinary, their brilliance was like the smokeless flame of fire, vast electricity, and the rays of the newly risen sun, they were free from violence, etc., free from attachment, without possessions, they had cut off the flow of existence, they had transcended birth and death, they were pure in body, free from impurities, and free from the karma-bond in terms of their mental state, they had destroyed love, attachment, hatred, and delusion, they were teachers of the Nirgrantha teachings, leaders, founders, and masters of the Dharma, surrounded by a group of ascetics, they possessed the thirty-four Buddha-atiśayas and the thirty-five satya-vacana-atiśayas of the Jinas, a celestial chariot, three celestial umbrellas, a celestial whisk, a throne made of pure crystal like the sky, a footstool, and a Dharma flag were moving ahead of them, they were surrounded by fourteen thousand monks and thirty-six thousand nuns, they were moving forward, from village to village, enjoying their journey, the Lord arrived at the Duṭīpālaśa Caitya in the city of Vāṇijyagrāma, they took a suitable place to stay, they were seated, meditating on the soul through restraint and austerity, the assembly gathered, King Jitasatru, King Kūṇika. 

Page #62:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Anand

[21]

Like this, the Lord went out to see and worship the Lord [He came to the Duitipalasa Caitya]. Arriving, he stopped at a suitable place, neither too far nor too close to the Lord. Seeing the umbrellas and other extraordinary things of the Tirthankaras, he stopped his chief elephant, dismounted, and removed his sword, umbrella, crown, and fly whisk, the royal insignia. He removed his shoes and went to where the Lord Mahavira was. Arriving, he performed the five practices: the separation of pure substances, the non-separation of impure and non-living substances, the wearing of an unbroken, unsewn garment like a Uttariya on his shoulder, the joining of his hands upon seeing the Dharma-Nayaka, and the concentration of his mind. Following these five practices, King Jitasatru went before the Lord. He circumambulated the Lord three times to the right, bowed, and prostrated. After bowing and prostrating, he performed physical, verbal, and mental worship. As physical worship, he sat with his hands and feet contracted, his face turned towards the Lord, listening attentively, and with joined hands in humility. As verbal worship, he spoke words of agreement, saying, "Yes, Bhagavan! This is the truth, Bhagavan! This is the truth, Prabhu! This is without doubt, Swami! This is desired, Bhagavan! This is accepted, Prabhu! This is desired, Bhagavan! As you say!" As mental worship, he generated intense devotion and a strong desire for liberation within himself.

**Anand's Worship**

10. Then Anand, the story-teller, said, "Like this, the Samana [Mahavira] went out, walking from village to village, staying here and there, in this town, in this village, or outside the town of the merchants, in the Duitipalasa Caitya. He stayed there, controlling himself with restraint and mindfulness. He thought to himself, 'Oh, Lord! Beloved of the Gods! For the sake of hearing the name of the Arhats, the Bhagavans, what to speak of approaching, bowing, prostrating, asking questions, and staying with them! For the sake of hearing one single righteous, virtuous, and good word, what to speak of grasping the vast meaning! I will go, Lord! I will go to see the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira. I will bow to him, prostrate to him, honor him, respect him, and stay with him for the sake of good fortune and auspiciousness.'

Thus, he resolved. Having resolved, he looked around, put on his pure white clothes, adorned himself with auspicious ornaments, and, wearing his fine garments and adorned with beautiful jewelry, he left his house. Having left, he rode in a chariot drawn by strong, powerful horses, with an umbrella held over him, and surrounded by a group of men. He went through the town of the merchants, and, having gone through, he went to the Duitipalasa Caitya, where the Samana, the Bhagavan Mahavira, was. Arriving, he performed the three prostrations. 

Page #63:
---------------------------
[22]
The devotee, the follower of the Upasakadasanga Sutra, bows and prostrates himself before the Jina.
Then, Anand, the leader of the caravan, seeing the prominent citizens of the city going to pay homage to the Lord, realized that the holy Shraman, Bhagwan Mahavira, [proceeding step by step, wandering from village to village, touching one village after another, has arrived here, has attained, has assembled, has come. Here, outside the city of Vanijyagram, in the Duutipalash Chaitya, he is staying in a suitable place,] absorbed in self-contemplation with restraint and austerity. Therefore, I shall obtain the great fruit of his darshan. [To hear the name and lineage of such an Arhat Bhagwan is a great thing, then to approach and go before him, to bow, to prostrate, to inquire, to ask, to contemplate, what to say of these? To hear even one good word, born of virtue, full of true Dharma, is a great thing; then what to say of the reception of a vast and extensive meaning? Therefore, it is good, I shall go and pay homage to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, honor him and respect him. The Lord is auspicious, prosperous, divine, a Tirtha-form, I shall contemplate him.]
Such thoughts arose in Anand's mind. He bathed, put on pure and auspicious clothes fit for the assembly, adorned his body with a few but precious ornaments, left his house, and going out, holding a canopy adorned with garlands of Kurant flowers, surrounded by men, walked on foot through the middle of the city of Vanijyagram, where the Duutipalash Chaitya was, where Bhagwan Mahavira was, and reached there. Reaching there, he performed three circumambulations, bowed, prostrated, and contemplated.
Dharma-Deshana
11. Then, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, seeing Anand, the leader of the caravan, spoke Dharma-katha (this assembly, Muni-assembly, Jina-assembly, Deva-assembly, many hundreds, many hundred-worshippers, many hundred-worshipper-families, those who are strong, those who are strong, those who are very strong, those who are of immeasurable strength and vigor, those who are full of radiance, those who are adorned with the new cloth of virtue, those who are sweet and deep, those who are like the sound of a conch shell, those who are like a drum, those who are spread out in the chest, those who are standing, those who are flowing, those who are like a stream, those who are like a river, those who are like a sea, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-ocean, those who are like a full ocean, those who are like a half-
Page #64:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Joy of Non-Possession

**[23 Restrictions on Possessions]** There are mountains, humans, illusions, and greed. (There are also:  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23]**  **[Page 23
Page #65:
---------------------------
[24]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
Just as a seed, when it sprouts, sheds its husk, just as the fruit of actions is obtained through attachment, just as those who have abandoned their actions go to the abode of the Siddhas, so too is Dharma of two kinds, namely, household Dharma and non-household Dharma. Non-household Dharma is this: one who has renounced the household life, having shaved his head, renounces the household life, refrains from all killing, refrains from all falsehood, refrains from all taking what is not given, refrains from all sexual misconduct, refrains from all attachment, refrains from all royal food. O friend! This is the Dharma prescribed for the non-household life. One who has renounced the household life, having received instruction in this Dharma, becomes a Niggantha, a Niggantha who lives in accordance with the teachings.
_ Household Dharma is of twelve kinds, namely, five Anuvvayai, three Gunavvayai, and four Sikkhavayai. The five Anuvvayai are: refraining from gross killing, refraining from gross falsehood, refraining from gross taking what is not given, contentment with little, and moderation in desires. The three Gunavvayai are: refraining from punishment for wrongdoing, seeing things as they are, and moderation in enjoyment and consumption. The four Sikkhavayai are: Samaiya, Desavagasiya, Posho-vavase, Atihi-sanvibhaage, Apchchhima-maranantiya-sanlehana-jhushana-rahana. O friend! This is the Dharma prescribed for the household life. One who has renounced the household life, having received instruction in this Dharma, becomes a Samanovasaya, a Samanovasaya who lives in accordance with the teachings.
Then, that great assembly of people, filled with joy and delight, with minds full of faith, with hearts filled with peace, with supreme joy, with hearts overflowing with love and compassion, rose up and, with great reverence, went to the presence of the Jina, the Great Hero, and, having reached him, bowed down and prostrated themselves. Having bowed down and prostrated themselves, they renounced the household life, having shaved their heads, and became Nigganthas. They renounced the household life, having received instruction in the five Anuvvayai, the seven Sikkhavayai, and the twelve kinds of household Dharma. The rest of the assembly bowed down and prostrated themselves before the Jina, the Great Hero, and, having bowed down and prostrated themselves, said: "Well done, O Nigganthas! You are worthy of praise! You are well-established, well-spoken, well-behaved, well-natured, and unsurpassed! You are worthy of praise, O Nigganthas! You have taught us the Dharma. Having taught us the Dharma, you have taught us renunciation. Having taught us renunciation, you have taught us restraint. Having taught us restraint, you have taught us to refrain from doing actions that lead to suffering. There are no other Samanas or Brahmanas who have taught such a Dharma. What more can be said? Having said this, they went in the same direction they had come from." The king also went.
After that, the Jina, the Great Hero, preached Dharma to Ananda Gathapati and the great assembly. 

Page #66:
---------------------------
First Study: Gathapati Ananda]
[25 done. [In the assembly present to listen to the Dharmadeshana of Bhagwan Mahavira, there were Rishis, Drashta, extremely knowledgeable Sadhus, Muni Mauni or Vaksyami Sadhu Yati, Shramanas who were very diligent in their conduct, Devaganas and groups of hundreds and hundreds of listeners.]
Ogh Bali [Holder of uninterrupted or uniform strength, Atibali-extremely powerful, Mahabali, endowed with abundant strength, unlimited infinite strength born of self-power, brilliance, importance and radiance, with a sweet, deep voice like the roar of new clouds in autumn, the cry of the Kronch bird and the sound of the drum, Bhagwan Mahavira, with the letters spread out in the heart, residing in the throat and pervading the head, with separate pronunciations of each letter in its own place, without indistinct pronunciation or stammering, with a well-defined sequence of letters, a combination of letters, with completeness and sweetness of voice, in a voice that reached a yojana, in the Ardhamagadi language, narrated the Dharma. He narrated the Dharma to all the present Aryas and non-Aryas with an eager mind without getting tired. The Ardhamagadi language uttered by Bhagwan was transformed into the languages of all those Aryas and non-Aryas.
The Dharmadeshana given by Bhagwan is as follows:
The existence of the world, the existence of the non-world. Similarly, Jiva, Ajeeva, Bandha, Moksha, Puny, Pap, Asrava, Sanvara, Vedana, Nirjara, Arhat, Chakravarti Baldev, Vasudev, Narak, Nairyaik, Tiryanchyooni, Tiryanchyoonik Jiva, Mata, Pita, Rishi, Dev Devalok, Siddhi, Siddha, Parinirvana, the state of spiritual well-being due to the weakening of karma-born coverings, supreme peace, the state of Parinivritta Parinirvana, the existence of such a person. Pranatipat, violence, Mrishvad, falsehood, Adattadan, theft, Maithun, and Parigraha.
Krodha, Mana, Maya, Lobha, [Love, an unexpressed Maya and Lobha-born pleasant or interesting feeling, Dvesha, an unexpressed Mana and Krodha-born unpleasant or unpleasant feeling, Kalha, fighting-quarrelling, Abhyakhyan, false accusation, Paishunya, gossip or revealing the faults of someone behind their back, Parparivad, slander, Rati, enjoying pleasure in the absence of restraint as a result of the rise of Mohaniya Karma, Ruchi, showing interest, Arati, disinterest in restraint as a result of the rise of Mohaniya Karma, Mayamrishna, lying deceitfully or deceptively,] all these are Mithyadarshan Shalya.
Pranatipat-viraman, refraining from violence, Mrishvad-viraman, refraining from falsehood, Adattadan-viraman, refraining from theft, Maithun-viraman, refraining from Maithun, Parigraha-viraman, refraining from Parigraha, all these are Mithyadarshan Shalya Vivek, the true knowledge of the thorn of false belief and its abandonment.
All Astibhav, in relation to their own Dravya, Kshetra, Kala and Bhava, are in the form of existence, and all Nastibhav, in relation to Dravya, Kshetra, Kala, Bhava, are in the form of non-existence. 

Page #67:
---------------------------
[26]
The Upasakadasanga Sutra expounds.  Well-formed, beautiful, and well-established acts of giving, good conduct, austerity, etc., are well-formed, excellent, and yield good results, while poorly formed, ill-established, sinful acts are inauspicious, sorrowful, and yield bad results.  A being touches and binds itself to merit and demerit.  Beings are born, there is birth and death for worldly beings.  Auspicious acts of merit and inauspicious acts of demerit bear fruit, they are not fruitless.

In another way, the Lord expounds the Dharma.  This is a discourse free from attachments, a teaching that liberates the inner attachments of the Jina teachings or of a being, a self-disciplined teaching, it is true, unsurpassed, the best, unique, or spoken by the Kevali, the omniscient, pure, very pure, completely free from faults, complete in all the qualities of a discourse, logical, consistent with reason, unhindered by evidence, and a remover of the thorns of delusion, etc., it is the path, the means to attain the state of perfection, the state of liberation, it is the path to the state of non-attachment, the state of freedom from greed, it is the path to liberation, the path that does not lead back, that does not fall into the cycle of birth and death, it is the path to Nirvana, the state of being free from all suffering, it is real, true, without interruption, and the path to the complete destruction of all suffering.  Beings who abide in this attain perfection, or they attain the great perfections like anima, etc., they become Buddhas, knowers, omniscient, they are liberated, they are free from the karmic particles that bring about birth and death, they attain Nirvana, they are free from the suffering caused by karma, they are perfectly peaceful, and they end all suffering.  Those who have only one human existence left, such as the Bhadanta, the blessed, or the devotees of the discourse free from attachments, are born as gods in some of the heavenly realms due to the remaining karmic residues.  Those heavenly realms are full of great wealth, abundant riches, very pleasant, with great speed, and long-lasting.  Those beings born as gods there are very powerful and long-lived.  Their chests are adorned with garlands, they illuminate the ten directions with their divine radiance.  They are born in the Kalpopag heavenly realm, in a divine bed, in the form of a youth.  They are currently the possessors of the excellent divine state, and in the future they will attain the state of liberation, the state of blessedness, Nirvana, they are extraordinary in appearance.

The Lord further said that beings bind themselves to the lifespan of the hellish realm due to four causes, and as a result they are born in various hells.
Those causes are: 1. Mahaarambha, the feeling and action of extreme violence, 2. Mahaparigraha, the feeling and action of excessive accumulation, 3. Panchendriya-vadha, the killing of beings with five senses, such as humans, animals, birds, etc., and 4. Mans-bhakshan, the eating of meat.

Due to these causes, beings are born in the animal realm: 1. Maya-purna nikriti, deceitful trickery, 2. Alik vachan, false speech, 3. Utkanchanta, false praise or flattery, or the hesitation of a wise man near a cunning man who deceives a fool, or... 

Page #68:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

**Concealing one's cunning, 4. Deception, cheating or fraud.**
These are the reasons why beings are born in the human realm:
1. **Praकृति - Bhadrata** - Natural goodness, kindness, where there is no fear or harm to anyone, 2. **Praकृति - Vineeta** - Natural humility, 3. **Sanukrosh** - Compassion, mercy, and 4. **Amatsarta** - Absence of envy.

These are the reasons why beings are born in the divine realm:
1. **Sarag-Samyama** - Restraint with attachment, or conduct before the destruction of attachment, 2. **Samyama-Samyama - Desh-Virati** - Shravak Dharma, 3. **Akama - Nirjara** - Enduring hardship without desire for liberation or due to compulsion, 4. **Bal-Tap** - Austerity in a state of ignorance or falsehood.

[27]

Thereafter, the Lord explains how beings go to hell, experience pain like the Nairyika in hell, and suffer physical and mental pain like those born in the animal realm. Human life is impermanent, filled with suffering from disease, old age, death, and pain. In the divine realm, gods and goddesses attain prosperity and divine happiness. Thus, the Lord has explained hell, hellish existence, the animal realm, the human realm, the divine realm, the realm of the liberated, and the six realms of existence.

The Lord has explained how beings are bound by karma, become liberated, experience afflictions, how many unattached individuals end their suffering, how beings with painful, agonizing, and troubled minds attain the ocean of suffering, how beings who attain detachment destroy the karmic knot, how the fruits of actions performed with attachment are sinful, how beings attain the state of liberation by being completely free from karma.

Further, the Lord explained that there are two types of Dharma: Agara-Dharma and Anagara-Dharma. In Anagara-Dharma, the seeker renounces all harmful actions, becomes a monk, and leaves the household life for the Anagara state. He completely refrains from violence, falsehood, stealing, sexual misconduct, attachment, and eating at night.

The Lord said, "O Auspicious one! This is the Dharma that is to be followed by the Anagaras." Those who are diligent in the study, practice, and conduct of this Dharma, and are free from attachment, are the followers of the Arhat's teachings.

The Lord explained that Agara-Dharma is of 12 types: 5 Anuvratas, 3 Gunavratas, and 4 Shikshavrata. The 5 Anuvratas are: 1. Refraining from violence, 2. Refraining from falsehood, 3. Refraining from stealing, 4. **Swadarasantosh** - The limit of sexual intercourse with one's own wife, 5. **Ichcha** - The limit or restriction of the desire for possessions.

The 3 Gunavratas are: 1. **Anarth-Dand - Viramna** - Refraining from actions harmful to the soul or detrimental to one's virtues, 

Page #69:
---------------------------
[28]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
1. Renunciation of futile activities, 2. Digvat - limitations or boundaries in relation to going in different directions, 3. Upbhog-Paribhog-Pariman - the quantity of consumption, things that can be consumed many times, such as clothes, etc., and things that can be consumed only once, such as food, etc., their quantity limitation. 4. Shikshavrata - these are as follows: 1. Samayik - practice done in a fixed time (minimum one Mahurt 48 minutes) for the attainment of equality or samatva-bhav, 2. Deshavakasik - practice of increasing the feeling of renunciation in one's activities every day, 3. Poshadhop-Vas - renunciation of food, celibacy, etc., as per the rules, for progressing in spiritual practice, and 4. Atithi-Sanvibhag - respectfully giving a part of one's authorized material to uninvited restrained sadhaks or sadharmic bandhus, whose arrival date is not known, keeping such a feeling in mind always that such an opportunity should be obtained.
Titikshapurvak - the final death, Sanlekhana-tapascharya, the worship of Amaran Anashan, the renunciation of the body, is the culmination of the sadhana of this life of a Shravak, who keeps the feeling of a Grihi Sadhak.
The Bhagwan said, "Ayushman! This is the conduct-based Dharma of Grihi Sadhaks. While striving to follow this Dharma, Shramanopasak Shravak or Shramanopasika Shravika become followers of the commandments."
Then that vast assembly of humans, having heard the Dharma from Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, holding it in their hearts, became very happy, experienced joy and delight in their minds, were filled with very gentle mental feelings, and with overflowing joy, rose up, rose up and circumambulated Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira three times, bowed and prostrated, and bowed and prostrated, and many of them renounced their household life, got their heads shaved, and became ordained as Anagar or Shraman. Many accepted the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata, a total of twelve types of Gahi-Dharma, Shravak-Dharma. The rest of the assembly bowed to Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, prostrated, bowed and prostrated, and said, "Bhagavan! What you have said in a beautiful and well-spoken manner, explained in a well-understood and excellent way, presented in a well-spoken and heart-touching language, well-invested in well-behaved disciples, easily accepted by the residents, well-natured, filled with noble feelings, un-bound, sermon, Dharma-upadesh, is the best of the best. While explaining the Dharma, you have analyzed the suppression of anger, etc. While explaining suppression, you have explained the nature of renunciation of external impurities. While explaining renunciation, you have explained the nature of renunciation or cessation. While explaining cessation, you have discussed the non-performance of sinful actions. There is no other Shraman or Brahmin who can preach such Dharma. Where is the talk of a Dharma-upadesh better than this? Saying this, that assembly returned to the direction from which it had come. The king also returned. 

Page #70:
---------------------------
##  [29
First Study:  Gathapati Ananda]  Ananda's Response
12. Then Ananda, the Gathapati, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding, adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless]. Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.
   Devanupriya! Please grant me this."
   Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said, "Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay."
Vrata-Grahana (Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence)
13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding, adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless]. Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.
   Devanupriya! Please grant me this."
   Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said, "Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay."
Vrata-Grahana (Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence)
13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding, adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless]. Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.
   Devanupriya! Please grant me this."
   Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said, "Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay."
Vrata-Grahana (Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence)
13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and bowed and prostrated himself. Having bowed and prostrated himself] he said, "Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha-Pravachana, I believe in it. Bhagavan! The Nirgrantha-Pravachana is pleasing to me. Bhagavan! It is such, it is true, it is real, it is desired, it is accepted, it is desired and accepted. It is just as you have said. Devanupriya! Just as many kings, wealthy, sword-wielding, adorned, family-oriented, merchants, generals, and caravan leaders, etc., have become monks, abandoning their homes and becoming homeless, I am unable to become a monk in that way [by abandoning my home and becoming homeless]. Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, and the twelve types of Griha-Dharma, the Shravaka-Dharma, from you.
   Devanupriya! Please grant me this."
   Upon hearing Ananda's words, the Bhagavan said, "Devanupriya! Do whatever brings you happiness, but do not delay."
Vrata-Grahana (Vow-Taking) Ahimsa Vrata (Vow of Non-Violence)
13. Then Ananda, the Gathapati, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, was filled with joy and satisfaction, and [with a heart filled with joy and happiness, with a very gentle mind, and with a heart overflowing with joy, he rose, and rising, he circumambulated the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times
Page #71:
---------------------------
[30]
The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should renounce all forms of gross violence (Thulagana Pranatipat) for the rest of their life, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). 
In other words, I renounce all forms of gross violence, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). I will not commit or cause others to commit gross violence with my mind, speech, or body.

**Truth Vow**
[14] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should renounce all forms of gross falsehood (Thulagana Musavada) for the rest of their life, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). 
In other words, I renounce all forms of gross falsehood, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). I will not commit or cause others to commit gross falsehood with my mind, speech, or body.

**Non-Stealing Vow**
[15] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should renounce all forms of gross theft (Thulagana Adinnadan) for the rest of their life, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). 
In other words, I renounce all forms of gross theft, both in action and in causing others to act, through the three yogas (mind, speech, and body). I will not commit or cause others to commit gross theft with my mind, speech, or body.

**Contentment with One's Own Spouse**
[16] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should practice self-control in sexual matters (Swadar-Santose). 
In other words, I renounce all forms of sexual activity except with my one wife, Shivananda.

**Control of Desire**
[17] The Upasakadasanga Sutra states that the Thulagana (lay follower) should practice self-control in their desires (Iccha-Vihi-Parimana). 
In other words, I renounce all forms of desire for gold, silver, and other material possessions. I will not desire more than four kotis of gold, four kotis of silver, four kotis of precious stones, etc. 

Page #72:
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Anand ]
He then made a limitation regarding the amount of possessions, in terms of gold coins, as follows:
[ 31
In addition to four crore gold coins kept in treasure, four crore gold coins used in business, and four crore gold coins used in the house and household equipment, I renounce all remaining gold coins.
18. Then he made a limitation regarding the amount of possessions, in terms of four-legged animals, as follows:
In addition to four herds of ten thousand cows each, I renounce all remaining four-legged animals.
19. Then he made a limitation regarding the amount of possessions, in terms of land and buildings, as follows:
In addition to five hundred ploughs, each consisting of one hundred nivartanas (a specific measure of land), I renounce all remaining land and buildings. Discussion
The word "khet" (field) refers to land used for farming, i.e., open land. The Prakrit word "vatthu" can be translated as "vastu" in Sanskrit, meaning "thing" or "building." "Vastu" refers to land, a place to live, a house, or a dwelling. Here, "vatthu" refers to Anand's land related to his house, etc.
In the context of the amount of land Anand owned for farming, the term "niyattan-saiyenam" (nivartanashatikena) is used, where one hundred nivartanas are considered one plough of land, which can be called a "bigha" in modern language.
In ancient times, "nivartana" was used as a specific measure of land. A land measuring twenty bamboos or two hundred hands in length and width (200 × 200 = 4000 square hands) was called a "nivartana."
20. Then he made a limitation regarding the amount of possessions, in terms of carts, as follows:
In addition to five hundred carts used for transportation and five hundred carts used for carrying goods, I renounce all remaining carts. 
1. Sanskrit - English Dictionary: Sir Monier Williams, page 560 

Page #73:
---------------------------
## 32]
[Upasakadasangasutra]

Except for five hundred carts used for travel, business, etc., and five hundred carts used for transporting household goods, I renounce all carts.

21. Then he made a determination regarding the category of vehicles. Except for four vehicles used for travel and four vehicles used for household purposes, I renounce all vehicles.

Then he made a determination regarding the category of vehicles. Except for four vehicles used for travel and four vehicles used for household purposes, I renounce all vehicles.

22. Then, renouncing the category of consumption, he made a determination regarding the category of towels. Except for one fragrant and red towel, I renounce all towels.

Then, renouncing the category of consumption, he made a determination regarding the category of towels. Except for one fragrant and red towel, I renounce all towels.

23. Then he made a determination regarding the category of tooth cleaners. Except for one tooth cleaner made of licorice root, I renounce all tooth cleaners.

Then he made a determination regarding the category of tooth cleaners. Except for one tooth cleaner made of licorice root, I renounce all tooth cleaners.

24. Then he made a determination regarding the category of fruits. Except for one milk-like amla, I renounce all fruits.

Then he made a determination regarding the category of fruits. Except for one milk-like amla, I renounce all fruits.

**Discussion**

Here, the term "fruit" does not refer to edible fruits, but rather to cleansing fruits used for purifying the eyes, head, etc. Amla is particularly useful for this purpose. Milk-like amla refers to a raw, soft amla that does not have a seed and is sweet like milk. 

Page #74:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gaathapati Anand

[33]
Here, the use of the term "fruit" refers to the use of purifying fruits for cleansing and washing purposes, such as for hair and scalp. Amla is particularly beneficial for this purpose. It is a tonic for hair. Amla contains a significant amount of iron. Therefore, it is especially beneficial for strengthening hair roots and keeping them black. Amla oil is the main oil used for hair applications.

Here, the mention of "Ksheer Amla" or milky Amla also has its own special meaning. Ksheer Amla refers to the soft, unripe Amla, which does not have a seed, is not particularly sour, and has a milky sweetness. Using excessively sour Amla can cause dryness in the skin. For those with sensitive skin, contact with excessively sour substances can cause irritation. This is not a concern with the use of Ksheer Amla.

Here, the word "fruit" is not used in the context of fruits consumed as food, but rather in the context of fruits that grow on trees and plants. Amla grows on a tree, hence it is a fruit, but it is not eaten as a fruit. It is primarily used in medicines, jams, chutneys, pickles, etc.

Amla holds a prominent position in the Ayurvedic medicinal category of "Kaasthaadhik" (wood-based) medicines. Ayurvedic texts classify it under the "Kaasthaadhik" category of medicines, not under the "Phal" (fruit) category. The "Bhaavaprakash" text describes Amla in the "Haritkyadhik" category. It states:

"Amla, Dhaatri, Trishvafala, and Amrita are the names of Amla. The taste, properties, and digestion of Amla are similar to Haritaki. Amla is particularly effective in eliminating blood disorders, diabetes, and is aphrodisiac and rejuvenating. Due to its sour taste, it is beneficial for Vata (air) disorders. Due to its sweetness and coolness, it pacifies Pitta (bile). Due to its dryness and astringency, it eliminates Kapha (phlegm)."

The "Charak Samhita" text, in the "Chikitsa Sthan" (therapeutic section), under the "Abhayamalakiya Rasayana Pad" (chapter on Amla-based rejuvenating therapies), describes Amla. It states:

[44]
"The properties of Amla are almost the same as those of Haritaki. However, the potency of Amla is..."

1. Trishvaamalaka maakhyaatam Dhaatri Trishvafala Amrita. Haritaki samam Dhaatri - phalam kintu visheshatah. Raktapitta pramehanam param vrushyam rasayanam.
Hanti vaatam tadamlataat pittam madhuryashaityatah.
Kapham rookshakashaayatvaat phalam dhaalyastraidoshajit.  Bhaavaprakash Haritkyadhik varg 37-39 

Page #75:
---------------------------
[34]
[This differs from the Upasakadasangasutra. That is, Haritaki is hot in potency, Amalaki is cold in potency. Seeing the qualities attributed to Haritaki, Haritaki and Amalaki, which have similar qualities, have been called Amrita.]
The Charaka Samhita mentions Kayakalp therapy in the form of Vatatapika and Kutipraveshika. Kutipraveshika is described in detail as being more effective.
This therapy uses Haritaki specifically for purification and Amalaki for nourishment. These are called Rasayana. Acharya Charaka has mentioned that the consumption of Rasayana leads to long life, memory, intelligence, youthful age, radiance, complexion, ojas-filled bodily aura, clear voice, bodily strength, sensory strength, etc.
Many lehyas are prepared from Amalaki as nutritious medicines, such as Chyavanprash, Brahmarasayan, Amalakarasayan, etc. Thus.
If Anand made an exception in the context of fruits, he was a resident of Bihar, it is very possible that he made an exception for mangoes in fruits, just as in grains, the best variety of rice is kept in Basmati rice. Mango is considered the king of fruits and is of the best quality and of many varieties in Bihar. Or there are even better types of fruits in that region, he may have kept one of them. In fact, as mentioned above, Anand did not make an exception for Amalaki from the point of view of eating fruit, he accepted it only for the purification of the head, eyes, hair, etc. This description is also in the same context. In the previous twenty-third sutra, Anand abandoned all types of toothbrushes except for Haritaki. Further, in the twenty-fifth sutra, he made a rule not to consume all massage oils except Shatapaka and Sahasrapaka oils. After that, in the twenty-sixth sutra, he abandoned all ubtans except for fragrant Gandhatak. Here, the context of eating fruit is not relevant. This whole context is related to the activities related to body purification, such as tooth brushing, bathing, massage, ubtan, etc.
Now a question arises, did Anand not make an exception for any fruit to eat? Yes
1.  **Taan gunaanstaani karmaani vidyaadaamalakeshvapi.**
**Yaanyuktaani haritakyaa veeryastu tu viparyayah.**
**Atachchaamritakalpaani vidyaatkarmabhiridrishai.**
**Haritakinaam shasyani bhishagaamalakasyacha.**
**Charaka Samhita Chikitsaasthan 1. 35-36**
**Charaka Samhita-Chikitsaasthan 1. 16-27**
**Deerghamaayu: smriti meghaamaarogyam taruunaam vayaha.**
**Prabhavarna swaroudaryadehendriyabalampuram.**
**Vaaksiiddhim pranati kaantim labhate na rasayanaat.**
**Laabhopaayo hi shastaanaam rasaadeenaam rasayanam.**
**Charaka Samhita-Chikitsaasthan 1. 7-8**
Page #76:
---------------------------
First Study: Gathapati Ananda]
[35
It is possible that he did not make any exceptions. Generally, he may have considered all fruits unacceptable in a conscious way. Dr. Rudolf Hornle has also discussed this. He has also given a similar indication.
25. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ abbhaṅgaṇavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha samapāgasahasrapāgehiṁ tallehiṁ avasesaṁ abbhaṅgaṇavihīṁ paccakkhāmi.
After that, he measured the Abhyanga-vidhi.
I renounce all other Abhyanga-vidhi - massage oils, except for the Shatapaka and Sahasrapaka oils.
Discussion
Shatapaka or Sahasrapaka oil would have been some special valuable oil, in which precious medicines were put. According to the indication made by Acharya Abhaydeva Suri in the Vritti in this regard, it may have been Shatapaka oil, in which 100 types of substances were put, which was cooked a hundred times or whose price was one hundred Karshapanas. Karshapan was a coin used in ancient India. It was of three different types, gold, silver and copper. It was called Swarna-Karshapan, Rajat-Karshapan or Tamra-Karshapan according to the metal used. The weight of Swarna-Karshapan was 16 Masas, the weight of Rajat-Karshapan was 16 Panas [special weight] and the weight of Tamra-Karshapan was 80 Rattis. 2
Where this order comes in thousands instead of hundreds, that oil is called Sahasrapaka. 26. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ uvvattanaavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha ekeṇaṁ surahiṇaṁ gandhatṭaeṇaṁ, avasesaṁ uvvattanaavihīṁ paccakkhāmi.
After that, he measured the Ubtan-vidhi.
I renounce all other Ubtans, except for one fragrant Gandhataka, a paste prepared by mixing some fragrant substances with wheat flour etc.
27. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ majjaṇavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha aṭṭahiṁ uṭṭiehiṁ udagasssa ghadehiṁ avasesaṁ majjaṇavihīṁ paccakkhāmi.
After that, he measured the bathing method.
I renounce all other bathing water, except for eight Austric-camel-shaped pots of water, whose mouths are narrow like a camel, the neck is long and the shape is large.
28. Tayaṇantaraṁ ca ṇaṁ vaththavihīpariṁāṇaṁ karei. Nannattha egeṇaṁ khom - juyaleṇaṁ, avasesaṁ
1. Uvasagadasao, Lecture I pages 15, 16
2. Sanskrit-English Dictionary-Sir Monier Williams, p. 176

Page #77:
---------------------------
[36]
I renounce all clothing except two cotton garments.
29. Then he measured the anointing method. I renounce all anointing substances except agarwood, saffron, and sandalwood.
30. Then he measured the flower method. I renounce all flowers except a single white lotus or a garland of jasmine flowers.
31. Then he measured the adornment method. I renounce all adornments except plain, unadorned earrings of pure gold and a ring with my name inscribed on it.
32. Then he measured the incense method. I renounce all incense except agarwood, frankincense, and sandalwood.
33. Then he measured the food method, and within that, the drink method. I renounce all drinks except a single drink made from a wooden vessel or a special drink made from rice cooked in ghee.
34. Then he measured the food method. I renounce all food except a single piece of sweetmeat made with ghee or a piece of dried fruit. 

Page #78:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

**37.  **He then made a determination regarding the method of consuming ghee.  I renounce all types of ghee except for ghee made from the best cow's milk during the autumn season.

**35. **He then made a determination regarding the method of consuming rice.  I renounce all types of rice except for rice made from the Kalma variety of paddy.

**Discussion:**
Kalma is likely a specific type of Basmati rice, a superior variety. Ananda was a resident of Videha, which is in North Bihar. Even then, as it is today, rice was probably the main food there. This is why only the method of consuming rice is mentioned in the context of determining the quantity of food grains. This implies renouncing all types of rice except for a specific variety. This suggests that wheat and other grains were not common or were consumed very little at that time.

**36. **He then made a determination regarding the method of consuming soup.  I renounce all types of lentils except for those made from peas, mung beans, and black gram.

**37. **He then made a determination regarding the method of consuming ghee.  I renounce all types of ghee except for ghee made from the best cow's milk during the autumn season.

**Discussion:**
Ananda's renunciation of certain foods, drinks, enjoyments, consumables, and services, i.e., the things he accepted for his own use, shows that he was very discerning in his choices. He included only the most useful, health-promoting, beneficial, and taste-enhancing substances in his consumption.

According to this sutra, Ananda only made an exception for consuming ghee made from cow's milk during the autumn season. 

Page #79:
---------------------------
[38]
It is natural to ask in the context of the Upasakadasangasutra whether Anand consumed cow ghee only during the autumn season throughout the year? Why did he not keep fresh ghee?
The truth is, from the perspective of rasa-poshan (nutritional value), autumn holds exceptional significance among all six seasons. According to Ayurveda, during autumn, amrita (life essence) drips from the rays of the moon. This is not an exaggeration. Autumn is the time that lies between the rainy and winter seasons. During this season, there is a special rasa-sanchar (flow of essence) in medicinal herbs, plants, trees, shrubs, and grasses. The plants that bear fruit during this time are strength-enhancing, beneficial, and delicious. It is highly likely that Anand's motivation behind consuming cow ghee during autumn was this very sentiment. The ghee from cows that graze on grass during this time possesses a special quality from the perspective of its properties. Ayurveda also believes that ghee that is one year old is mature ghee. It is particularly beneficial for health and easy to digest. Fresh ghee is heavy to digest.
_ In Bhava Prakash, it is written about ghee: "After one year, ghee is considered ancient. Such ghee destroys the three doshas - vata, pitta, and kapha - and balances all three. It destroys fainting, leprosy, poison-related ailments, madness, epilepsy, and timir (darkness before the eyes).
This mention in Bhava Prakash makes it clear that ghee is not inedible for a year. It is an excellent food. It is both nourishing and dosha-destroying. If ghee is heated thoroughly and filtered after removing buttermilk, etc., it does not develop foul odor, bad taste, or other defects for a year.
As a medicine, the older the ghee, the better it is considered. Bhava Prakash writes:
"As ghee becomes older, its qualities increase more and more."
Kalyanakghrit, Mahakalyanakghrit, Lashunadyghrit, Panchgavyghrit, Mahapanchgavyghrit, Brahmi ghrit, etc., all the ghritas that are prepared in Ayurveda for the treatment of various diseases, use ancient cow ghee. For example, in the Charaka Samhita, it is written about Brahmi ghrit:
"Brahmi ghrit is said to be prepared from the juice of Brahmi, vach, kuth, and shankhpushpi, and ancient cow ghee."
1. वर्षादूर्ध्व भवेदाज्यं पुराणं तत् त्रिदोषनुत्। मूर्छाकुष्टविषोन्मादापस्मारतिमिरापहम्॥
_ Bhava Prakash, Ghritavarg 15 1. यथा यथाऽखिलं सर्पिः पुराणमधिकं भवेत्। तथा तथा गुणैः स्वैः स्वैरधिकं तदुदाहृतम् ॥
_ Bhava Prakash, Ghritavarg 16

Page #80:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Joy of the Verses

**[39]**
"This madness, the lack of Lakshmi's radiance, epilepsy, and the sin of bodily defilement, these diseases it destroys." [1]

This passage suggests that Anand used only ghee from the autumn season throughout the year. Even today, those who have an abundance of cattle keep a store of ghee throughout the year. Notably, ghee from other seasons like the rainy season is not as durable as autumn ghee. The key reason for this durability is the cow's diet, which is at its peak ripeness and richness in the autumn season.

**[38]**
"Then he measured the varieties of greens. I renounce all greens except bathua, bottle gourd, spinach, and okra."

**[39]**
"Then he measured the varieties of sweet things. I renounce all sweet things except the sweet drink made from the gum of the palang madhurak-shallaki (a specific tree)."

**[40]**
"Then he measured the varieties of dishes. I renounce all dishes except those made with kanji, large beans, and sour mung dal dumplings."

**[41]**
"Then he measured the varieties of drinks. I renounce all drinks except the drink made from the roots of the antalikkh-odaya, and also from the brahma-rasa, vacha, kustha, and shankapushpi.

**[Note]**
* Ancient ghee is said to cure madness, lack of Lakshmi's radiance, epilepsy, and sin. [Charaka Samhita, Chikitsa Sthana 10.24.1.2]
* Some wise people have considered a specific division of the day as autumn, and the ghee produced in that specific division as autumn ghee.
* In the traditional sense, madhurak-vidhi refers to the method of fruits, which includes nuts along with fruits, and palang refers to the mango produced from a vine. Some interpret it as khirni (rayan fruit). 

Page #81:
---------------------------
[40]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
I renounce all water except for the water that falls from the sky.
[42]
Then he renounced all mouthwashes except for those made with five fragrant substances.
Commentary
Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, the commentator, mentions cardamom, cloves, camphor, cinnamon, and nutmeg as the five fragrant substances. It seems that wealthy people used these in their mouthwashes. They are beneficial for health as well as being fragrant.
[43]
Then he renounced the four types of Anarthadanda: Apadhyanacharita, Pramadacharita, Himstra-pradana, and Papakarmopadesha.
Commentary
Violence that is done without any purpose is included in Anarthadanda. Although violence is violence, there is a big difference between violence that is done for a worldly purpose or need and violence that is done without any purpose. When a person is forced to commit violence for a need or purpose, he can be forgiven from a practical point of view, but the one who commits violence without any purpose or meaning is completely inappropriate. Therefore, it is called Anarthadanda.
Acharya Abhaydeva Suri, the commentator, has called the violent acts done without the purpose of Dharma, Artha, and Kama as Anarthadanda.
Apadhyanacharita, which is included in Anarthadanda, means evil thinking. Evil thinking is also a kind of violence. It destroys the virtues of the soul. There are two types of evil thinking: Artadhyan and 

Page #82:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

[41]
**Roudradhyan:** When desired things like wealth, progeny, health, etc. are not obtained, and when undesirable situations like poverty, illness, separation from loved ones, etc. occur, the painful and distorted thinking that arises in the mind is called **Artadhyan**. Thinking continuously about harming others due to anger, hatred, and animosity is called **Roudradhyan**. Both these types of thinking are **Anarthadanda** in the form of **Apadhyanacharit**.

**Pramadacharit:** Lack of awareness about one's dharma, responsibilities, and duties is **Pramad**. Such a negligent person often spends their time criticizing others, gossiping, boasting about their greatness, and engaging in obscene talk. The mental, verbal, and physical vices related to these fall under **Pramadacharit**.

**Himstra-Pradan-Hinsa:** Directly assisting in acts of violence, such as providing weapons, shelter, or other forms of support to thieves, robbers, and hunters. This encourages and supports violence, making it **Anarthadanda**.

**Papakarmopadesh:** Inspiring, advising, or counseling others to engage in sinful acts. For example, telling a hunter that he will find many animals suitable for hunting in a particular place, inciting someone to trouble others, or encouraging people to harm animals. All of these fall under **Papakarmopadesh**.

These four types of evil acts included in **Anarthadanda** are those that every righteous, cultured, and civilized citizen should abandon. This is essential not only for spiritual progress but also for a good and ethical civic life.

**Atichara of Samyaktva**

[44]
"O Ananda! The Bhagwan Mahavira told the Shramanopasaka Ananda, 'O Ananda! The Shramanopasaka who has truly understood the nature of Jiva, Ajeeva, and other substances (who understands the difference between punya and papa, who is unwilling to help others, who is unshakeable by the teachings of the Nirgrantha by the Devas, Asuras, Nagas, Suparna, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Garuda, Gandharva, Mahoraga, and other Devas), should know the five main **Atichara** of **Samyaktva** and should not practice them. Those **Atichara** are:

**Bhagava** 

Page #83:
---------------------------
## Chapter 42:

**The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra is as follows:** Doubt, Desire, Hesitation, Praise of Other Sects, and Glorification of Other Sects.

**Discussion:**

Accepting vows is not as difficult as adhering to them steadfastly. Adherence requires constant vigilance. One must remain unwavering even in the face of obstacles. To ensure stability in the vows taken and to prevent weakness in the mind of the Upasaka, the Jain practice of Sadhana-Paddhati provides a beautiful solution in the form of Atichar-Varjan.

Atichar means any kind of weakness, lapse, or partial defilement in the vow. If the Upasaka cannot overcome Atichar, it transforms into Anacahar. Anacahar means breaking the vow. Therefore, it is essential for the Upasaka to understand Atichars properly and to avoid them with awareness and self-strength.

The most important thing for an Upasaka is Samyaktava - that is, true faith in the principles, truth, and right belief. If the Upasaka loses Samyaktava, what else can they save? When untruth takes the place of truth in faith, it naturally leads to contradictions in conduct and life. Therefore, Bhagwan Mahavir first pointed out the Atichars of Samyaktava to the Shraman Upasaka and advised them not to engage in such conduct.

Here is a brief discussion of the five Atichars of Samyaktava:

**Doubt:** Doubt is having doubts about the principles spoken by the omniscient, such as the soul, heaven, hell, merit, demerit, bondage, liberation, etc. When doubt arises in the mind, faith falters, and belief wavers, it is called doubt. When doubt arises, the feeling of curiosity diminishes. Doubt is rooted in curiosity. When a person wants to know more about a principle or subject for clarity and to strengthen their belief, they ask questions. This is not called doubt because it strengthens their faith. In the Jain Agamas, when there is a sequence of questions and answers with Bhagwan Mahavir, it is said that doubt arises in the mind of the Prashrika. The questions of Indrabhuti Gautam, a prominent disciple of Bhagwan Mahavir, and the answers of Bhagwan are scattered throughout the entire Agam literature. Wherever Gautam asks questions, there is a mention of doubt arising in his mind. At the same time, he is also called a devout believer. Gautam's doubt was rooted in curiosity. It is not a fault for a Samyaktavi to have a doubt with faith, but they should not have a doubt rooted in disbelief.

**Desire:** Generally, this means to turn or bend one's desire towards something else. In this context, it means being influenced by external appearances, pomp, or other temptations and leaning towards another belief. A Samyaktavi should not be influenced by external displays.

**Hesitation:** The human mind is very fickle. It is filled with various resolutions and alternatives. 

Page #84:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Anand

**[43]** Sometimes, doubts arise in the mind of a devotee: "Will the fruits of my religious practices, austerities, etc., be realized?" This doubt is called **vichchikitsa**. When such a doubtful feeling arises in the mind, the pace of work naturally slows down, and discouragement increases. This situation is a major obstacle to the success of the work. A **samyaktvī** should avoid this.

**[Par-Paashand-Prashansa]** According to linguistics, the meaning of a word can change completely over time in different circumstances. This is the case with the word **paashand**. The word **paashand** or **paashandi** used today is a form of this, but the meaning then and now is completely different. In the time of Lord Mahavira and for centuries after, the word **paashandi** was used for followers of other faiths. Today, the word **paashand** has a derogatory meaning. A hypocrite is called a **paashandi**. In ancient times, the word **paashand** was not associated with condemnation. In Ashoka's inscriptions, this word has been used for followers of other faiths in many places.

**Par-Paashand-Prashansa** is the fourth **atichaar** of **samyaktvī**, which means that a **samyaktvī** should not be an admirer of followers of other faiths. The word **prashansa** used here does not mean practical courtesy, but its theoretical meaning. Being an admirer of followers of other faiths means respecting their religious principles. This happens only when there is a lack of faith in one's own beliefs. In other words, it is an indication of a weakening of faith. A person should remain firm in the faith that they have adopted after careful consideration. Such acts of praise, etc., certainly hinder the firmness of faith. Therefore, this is not narrow-mindedness, but a useful measure to strengthen faith.

**[Par-Paashand-Sanstav]** The meaning of **sanstav** is close contact or intimate acquaintance. Religious contact or association with followers of other faiths, **paashandis**, is not beneficial for a devotee. It can lead to deviation in their faith.

**[Ahimsa-Vrat Atichaar]**

**[45]** After this, a **shramanopasaka** should know the five major **atichaars** of the **sthūla-prāṇātipāta-viramaṇa** vow, and should not practice them. They are as follows:

* **Bandha**
* **Vadha**
* **Chhavi-Chheda**
* **Atibhāra**
* **Bhakta-Pān-Vyavachheda**

**[Discussion]**

**Bandha** - This means to tie. To tie animals, etc., in such a way that they suffer, is **bandha**. 

Page #85:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**44]**

[This comes from the Upasakadasangasutra. Commentators have also discussed the binding of slaves, etc. Binding them in a way that causes them suffering is also included in this transgression. The mention of binding slaves, etc., points to the time in India when slaves and slave girls were bought and sold like animals and unjust materials. The master had complete authority over them. Like animals, they were forced to serve them for life.

The scriptures mention two types of binding - one is Artha-bandh and the other is Anartha-bandh. Binding for a purpose or reason falls under Artha-bandh, such as binding someone for medical treatment or to protect them from danger. Binding without purpose or reason is Anartha-bandh. It is completely violence. This falls under Anartha-danda in the eighth vow called Anartha-danda-viraman. There should be no contaminated emotions like anger, cruelty, hatred associated with binding for a purpose. If they are present, it is a transgression. Commentators have divided Artha-bandh into two categories - relative and absolute. Relative binding is one from which one can be released, for example, if a fire breaks out and an animal is tied there, if it is lightly tied, it can escape from there. Such binding does not fall under transgression. But the binding from which one cannot be released even after trying in a fearful situation is absolute binding. It falls under transgression. Because the bound creature suffers greatly due to not being able to escape, it may even die.

Vadh - Generally, the meaning of Vadh is to kill someone. But here Vadh is not used in this sense. Because killing someone would completely violate the vow of non-violence. It is a sin. Here Vadh is used in the sense of a fatal blow, a blow that causes harm to the limbs or body parts of the struck person.

Chhavi-chhed - Chhavi means beauty. It is also used to mean a limb. Chhavi-chhed means to destroy someone's beauty, splendor, or to mutilate their limbs. Cutting off someone's limb naturally makes them devoid of beauty. Cutting off someone's limb in a fit of anger is included in this transgression. Cutting the tails, ears, etc., of pet animals like dogs for entertainment is also included in this transgression.

Ati-bhar - Loading more weight on animals, slaves, etc., than their strength can bear is included in Ati-bhar. In today's language, taking more work from servants, laborers, authorized employees than their capacity is Ati-bhar.

Bhakta-pan-vyavchhed - This means to obstruct or hinder food and drink. For example, not giving your dependent animal sufficient fodder and water on time, keeping it hungry and thirsty. The same applies to slaves and slave girls. Creating obstacles or disruptions in their food and drink arrangements is included in this transgression. In today's language, not providing your servants and employees, etc., with food and drink on time... 

Page #86:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

[45]
Not paying wages, unfairly deducting wages, obstructing someone's livelihood, demanding excessive work from servants and dependents, but not providing them with adequate and proper food in proportion to their work, not paying wages - all these are included in this transgression. Doing such things is a bad deed, it is playing with the lives of people.
The special mention of animals in these transgressions makes it clear that animal husbandry was an essential part of a householder's life at that time. Animals were used extensively in household, agricultural and commercial activities. Today, social conditions have changed. Cruelty, brutality, and oppression have emerged in many new forms. Therefore, the devotee should carefully examine his daily life, grasp the essence of these transgressions, and avoid cruel acts.

## Transgressions of Satyavrata

[46]
Thereafter, one should know the five transgressions of the vow of refraining from gross falsehood, and should not engage in them. They are as follows:
* Saha-abhyakhyan
* Rahasya-abhyakhyan
* Swadaramantra-bhed
* Mrish-upadesh
* Kood-lekh-karan

## Explanation

* **Saha-abhyakhyan:** Accusing someone falsely and abruptly without thinking.
* **Rahasya-abhyakhyan:** Revealing someone's secret or confidential matter.
* **Swadaramantra-bhed:** Revealing the secret of one's wife.
* **Mrish-upadesh:** Giving someone wrong advice or false teachings.
* **Kood-lekh-karan:** Writing a false or forged document, preparing false or forged documents to cheat or deceive others.

**Saha-abhyakhyan:** Saha means abruptly. When something is said hastily without thinking, this word is used. In doing so, emotion works more than reason. Saha-abhyakhyan means accusing someone falsely and abruptly without thinking. If this accusation is made with malice, ill-will, and distress, then it is not a transgression, it becomes a sin. There, the devotee's vow is broken. There is some lightness in doing so without thinking. However, the devotee should not accuse anyone in this way even out of anger or emotion. This weakens or loosens the vow. 

Page #87:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 46:

**Rahasya-Abhyakhyan**

The term "Rahasya" means secrecy or a secret matter. "Rahasya-Abhyakhyan" refers to suddenly revealing a secret matter. This is not permissible for an Upasaka (Jain practitioner). Doing so weakens their vows. 

Another meaning of "Rahasya-Abhyakhyan" is to accuse someone of conspiracy or other wrongdoing in secret. For example, if individuals are privately discussing something, and someone accuses them of plotting without any evidence, this falls under this transgression. 

It's important to note that this transgression only applies when the accusation is made suddenly, without thought or consideration. If the accusation is made intentionally and with malice, it becomes an "Anachaar" (grave transgression) and breaks the vows.

**Swadaramantra-Bhed**

This refers to revealing personal, family, or social secrets. Some matters are meant to be shared only between two individuals, while others can be shared with the entire community. The relationship between a husband and wife is the most intimate. They have their own private conversations and thoughts. If a husband reveals a secret of his wife that should not be disclosed, he commits the transgression of "Swadaramantra-Bhed." This is also ethically wrong. The person whose secret is revealed feels hurt by the breach of trust and may feel ashamed of their vulnerability.

**Mrish-Upadesh**

This refers to giving false advice or opinions. It means giving advice about something whose truth, falsehood, benefit, or harm is unknown to the person giving the advice, but is actually false. This transgression also includes encouraging someone to do something that is known to be false or harmful. If someone intentionally encourages others to do something they know is wrong, it becomes an "Anachaar" and breaks the vows. However, if someone believes something to be true or beneficial, even if it is actually false, and encourages others based on their good intentions, it is not considered a transgression.

**Kood-Lekhakarana**

This refers to creating false documents, forging signatures, etc. This is a transgression only if the Upasaka does it unintentionally, out of ignorance, or unwillingly. If someone intentionally creates a forged document, uses a fake seal or stamp, or forges a signature to deceive others, it becomes an "Anachaar" and breaks the vows. 

Page #88:
---------------------------


Page #89:
---------------------------


Page #90:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

**[49]** There are 49 causes. The vow is not tainted until that need is fulfilled, but it should not be afflicted by intense desire or unrestrained lust, because it can lead to a violation of the vow, a breach of decorum, and a tendency towards other excesses and improprieties.

A person should not indulge in aphrodisiacs, aphrodisiac drugs, intoxicants, etc., due to intense sensual desires. This is very important from a moral standpoint. Doing so is the fifth transgression of this vow, from which the devotee should completely abstain.

**Transgressions of the Desire-Quantity Vow**

**49.** The five transgressions of the Desire-Quantity vow should be known by the Shramanopasaka, and not be practiced. They are as follows:

* **Kshetra-Vastu-Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of land and property.
* **Hiranya-Suvarna-Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of gold and silver.
* **Dvipad-Chatushpad-Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of bipeds and quadrupeds.
* **Dhana-Dhanaya-Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of wealth and grain.
* **Kupy-Pramanatikram:** Exceeding the limit of anger.

**Discussion:**

Wealth, affluence, and prosperity are such attractions in worldly life that even wise and discerning individuals get caught in their allure. The Desire-Quantity vow is a path to liberation from that allure. The goal of this vow is for the individual to gradually limit their material possessions. The transgressions mentioned in this vow, which should be avoided, provide a special motivation for limiting desires.

**Kshetra-Vastu-Pramanatikram:** Kshetra refers to land used for cultivation. When taking the vow, the devotee should not exceed the amount of land they have set aside for themselves. Vastu (Vathu) refers to dwelling places, gardens, etc. When taking the vow, the Shravaka also sets limits for these. Crossing these limits is a transgression of this vow.

**Hiranya-Suvarna-Pramanatikram:** When taking the vow, the devotee sets a limit for themselves regarding precious metals like gold and silver. Exceeding that limit is a transgression of this vow. This also includes current coins like mohars and rupees.

**Dvipad-Chatushpad-Pramanatikram:** Dvipad - two-legged - humans, slaves, servants, and Chatushpad - four-legged - animals. Exceeding the limits set regarding these when taking the vow is included in this transgression. As mentioned earlier, slavery was prevalent in those days. 

Page #91:
---------------------------
The Upasakadasangasutra was prevalent in this country, therefore, like cows, bulls, buffaloes, etc., slaves and maidservants were also the property of their masters.
Wealth, grain, and their quantities: Jewels like gems, pearls, diamonds, emeralds, etc., and items bought and sold are called wealth here. Rice, wheat, barley, chickpeas, etc., are included in grain. Exceeding the quantity of wealth and grain is a transgression of this vow.
Quantity of household goods: Household goods refer to items like clothes, beds, mats, bedding, furniture, etc. Exceeding the limit in this regard is a transgression of this vow.
It is noteworthy here that this transgression is considered an offense only when it is unintentional, i.e., when the vow-taker actually transgresses but believes that they are not transgressing. Deliberately exceeding the limit becomes a sin. Transgressions of the Digvrat
50. Subsequently, one should know the five transgressions of the Digvrat, and not engage in them. They are as follows: Urdhvadik-pramanatikram, Adhodik-pramanatikram, Tiryadik-pramanatikram, Kshetra-vridhi, Smrityantardhan.
Discussion
Urdhvadik-pramanatikram - Exceeding the limit of going upwards, Adhodik-pramanatikram - Exceeding the limit of going downwards into wells, mines, etc., Tiryadik-pramanatikram - Exceeding the limit of going in oblique directions, Kshetra-vridhi - Exceeding the limit of the area for business, travel, etc., Smrityantardhan - Not remembering the limits of directions, etc., that one has set for oneself - these are the transgressions of this vow.
Although the Digvrat and Shikshavrats are not mentioned in the context of vow-taking, one should understand that these vows are also taken, because Anand had previously said, "I will renounce the twelve types of Savayadharma." Further, the text says, "He renounces the twelve types of Savagadharma." The commentator clarifies that Anand did not take the Shikshavrats like Samayik, etc., at that time because they are for a short period and are to be performed at specific times. The Digvrat was also not taken at that time because it lacks restraint. 

Page #92:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

**[51. Excesses of the Upbhog-Paribhog-Parimaan Vrat]**

**51.** There are two types of Upbhog-Paribhog, as defined: one with respect to food, and the other with respect to actions. 

With respect to food, a Shramanopasak should know and avoid five excesses of the Upbhog-Paribhog Vrat. These are: 
* Sachitta Ahar (consuming living beings)
* Sachitta-Pratibandha Ahar (consuming food that has been in contact with living beings)
* Appakva-Oshadhi-Bhakhanata (consuming unripe herbs)
* Duspakva-Oshadhi-Bhakhanata (consuming improperly cooked herbs)
* Tuchchha-Oshadhi-Bhakhanata (consuming inferior herbs)

With respect to actions, a Shramanopasak should know and avoid fifteen Karmaadanas. These are:
* Ingalakarma (working with fire)
* Vanakarma (working in the forest)
* Sadikarma (working with carts)
* Bhadikarma (working in a furnace)
* Phodikarma (working with explosives)
* Dantavaanijya (trading in teeth)
* Lakshavaanijya (trading in lac)
* Rasavaanijya (trading in juices)
* Vishavaanijya (trading in poisons)
* Keshavaanijya (trading in hair)
* Jantapilana Karma (torturing animals)
* Nilanchhana Karma (marking animals)
* Davagnidavan (lighting fires)
* Sar-Hrad-Tadaga-Shoshan (drying up lakes and ponds)
* Asati-Jan-Poshan (feeding non-believers)

**Explanation:**

Sachitta Ahar: Sachitta means "with life" or "living." Uncooked or unboiled vegetables, plants, fruits, unprocessed grains, water, etc., are all Sachitta substances. Here, the context is about consuming them.

It should be understood that a Shramanopasak or Shravak does not completely abstain from Sachitta substances. It is not mandatory for them to do so. They abstain from Sachitta substances according to their capacity, setting a limit. They make exceptions for certain things that they can consume. If, due to carelessness, they violate the limits they have set, it falls under the excess of Sachitta Ahar. This is about carelessly violating the rules regarding Sachitta substances. If they knowingly violate the limits of Sachitta-tyaga, it becomes an act of misconduct, and the Vrat is broken.

Sachitta-Pratibandha Ahar: Consuming food that has been in contact with a Sachitta substance is called Sachitta-Pratibandha Ahar. For example, one can take a large grape or date. Each of them has two parts... 

Page #93:
---------------------------
## 52]
[The Upasakadasanga Sutra]

**Fruit and Pulp:** The seed is *saccitta* (possessing consciousness), the pulp or juice is *acitta* (lacking consciousness). However, the *acitta* is bound or attached to the *saccitta*. This transgression is relative to the person who has observed the limits of *saccitta* objects. If they consume something attached to the *saccitta*, their limits are broken, and they fall into transgression.

**Unripe-Medicine-Consumption:** Eating unripe herbs, fruits, chickpeas, etc. The term "medicine" can also be replaced with "cooked rice." The meaning of "cooked rice" is cooked rice, so another meaning would be eating raw or undercooked rice.

**Badly-Cooked-Medicine-Consumption:** Consuming herbs, fruits, etc., that take a long time to cook, knowing they are cooked but consuming them in an uncooked state, or consuming food cooked in a way that involves excessive violence. For example, roasted corn with the husk on, or boiled peas in their pods, because these methods of cooking can involve the killing of tiny living beings.

**Trivial-Medicine-Consumption:** Consuming herbs or fruits where the edible part is small, the useless or discardable part is large, such as sugarcane, custard apple, etc. Another meaning is consuming things that involve a lot of violence in their consumption, such as poppy seeds, sesame seeds, buckwheat, etc.

The underlying idea behind these transgressions is that the devotee should be very aware in the context of food. They should always avoid tongue-lust. It is very difficult to conquer the taste of the tongue, so the devotee should be very careful in this regard.

**Karma-Adana:** The two words "karma" and "adana" combine to form "karma-adana." The meaning of "adana" is "to receive." Karma-adana refers to those tendencies that lead to the strong bondage of karma like knowledge-obscuration, etc. These actions involve a lot of violence. Therefore, they are forbidden for the Shravak. These are transgressions related to karma. The Shravak is encouraged to abandon them at every opportunity. It is said that they should not do them themselves, nor should they cause others to do them, nor should they support those who do them.

**Analysis of Karma-Adana:**

**Angar-Karma:** The meaning of "angar" is coal. The main meaning of "angar-karma" is the business of making coal. Any work that involves a lot of fire and coal also falls under this category. For example, brick kilns, lime kilns, cement factories, etc. These activities involve extreme violence.

**Van-Karma:** Those businesses that are related to the forest fall under "van-karma." For example, clearing the forest by cutting down trees, selling wood from forest trees, taking contracts to cut down forests, etc. These are also extremely violent activities due to the cutting and piercing of green vegetation and the killing of animals associated with it. Cutting down trees for livelihood, producing forest products, and cultivating trees are also "van-karma."

**Shakat-Karma:**
The meaning of "shakat" is a cart. Here, the cart refers to all vehicles used for transportation or carrying goods. 
- 

Page #94:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gaathapaati Aananad

[53 types of vehicles exist. Preparing, selling, etc. of such vehicles, their parts or components is included in Shaktakarma. In today's situation, factories that manufacture trains, cars, scooters, bicycles, trucks, tractors, etc. also fall under this category.

Bhaatikarma - Bhaati means fare. The business of renting out bulls, horses, buffaloes, mules, etc.

Sphotankarma - Sphotan means to break, demolish or dig. The business of digging mines, breaking stones, digging wells, ponds and bawdis, etc. falls under Sphotan-karma.

Dantavaanijya - The main meaning is the trade of ivory. However, the trade of bones, leather, etc. should also be included here by implication.

Laakshavaanijya - The trade of lac.

Rasavaanijya - The trade of intoxicating substances like liquor, etc. Although the word 'ras' is generally used for sugarcane and fruit juices, that is not the meaning here.

Many Acharyas have also included the trade of honey, meat, fat, butter, milk, curd, ghee, oil, etc. in Rasavaanijya.

Vishvaanijya - The trade of various types of poisons. The trade of weapons like swords, knives, daggers, guns, bows, arrows, gunpowder, firecrackers, etc. is also included under Vishvaanijya.

Keshavaanijya - The word 'kesh' used here is metaphorical. Keshavaanijya means the business of buying and selling living beings like slaves, maids, cows, buffaloes, goats, sheep, camels, horses, etc. Some Acharyas have also included the trade of cowtail hair in this. These are used to make chawars. This is not the case with peacock feathers and wool. The trade of cowtail hair is included here because of the killing involved.

Yantrapidaankarma - The business of extracting oil from oilseeds like sesame, mustard, taramira, tori, peanuts, etc. using a kolhu or ghani.

Nilaanchanakarma - The business of castrating bulls, buffaloes, etc.

Davaagnidapan - The business of setting fire to forests. This fire is extremely terrifying and uncontrolled. It causes the horrific destruction of many mobile and immobile beings in the forest.

Sarhadatadaagshoshan - Drying up of lakes, ponds, etc. water bodies.

Asati-jan-poshan - Nourishing and employing prostitutes, etc. for adultery. This is truly a reprehensible act for a Shravak. It spreads immorality in society and encourages adultery. 
]
Page #95:
---------------------------
[54]
[Upasakadasangasutra] Hunting, keeping hunting dogs, etc., keeping cats for mice - all these also fall under the category of astijans-poshan. - Anarthadanda-viraman's excess
52. Tayanantara cha nan ananudandaveeramanassa samanovasaenam panch aiyara janiyavva, na samaayariyavva, tanjaha kandappe, kukkudue, moharie, sanjuttahingarne, uvabhogparibhogaireitte.
Thereafter, the Shramanopasak should know the five excesses of the Anarthadanda-viraman vow, he should not practice them. They are as follows:
Kandarpa, Kautkuchya, Moukharya, Sanjuktaadhikaran and Upbhogparibhogaatirek. Discussion
Kandarpa - To make efforts that incite lust. Kautkuchya - To make ugly and distorted efforts like the multi-faceted. Moukharya - To boast unnecessarily, to make pointless talk, to talk nonsense. Sanjuktaadhikaran - To gather weapons, etc., means of violence.
Upbhog-paribhogaatirek - Excess of consumption and consumption - unnecessary increase - collecting materials and equipment related to consumption and consumption without need.
These are the excesses of this vow. Samayik vow's excesses
53. Tayanantara cha nan samaayikassa samanovasaenam panch aiyara janiyavva, na samaayariyavva tanjaha-manaduppanihane, vayaduppanihane, kayaduppanihane, samaayikassa saiakaranaya, samaayikassa anavatthiassa karanaya.
Thereafter, the Shramanopasak should know the five excesses of the Samayik vow, he should not practice them. They are as follows:
Man-dusprnidhan, Vachan-dusprnidhan, Kay-dusprnidhan, Samayik-smriti-akaranata, Samayik-anavathit-karanata. Discussion
Man-dusprnidhan - Here, the meaning of prnidhan is meditation or contemplation. Corrupted thinking is called Man-dusprnidhan. During Samayik, bringing up things related to raga, dvesha, mamata, asakti in the mind, being anxious in the worry of domestic problems, this is an excess of Samayik. The purpose of Samayik is life 

Page #96:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

**[55]** The ultimate goal of Samayik is to cultivate equanimity and gradually eliminate the inequalities arising from anger, pride, delusion, and greed. By doing so, one attains complete immersion in the pure self. Where this objective of Samayik is hindered, Samayik becomes a mere traditional practice, failing to achieve the desired results in life. Therefore, it is essential for the seeker to maintain a pure mind, experience equanimity, and avoid mental anxieties.

**Vachan-Duspraṇidhāna-Samayik:** During Samayik, misusing speech, engaging in false speech, uttering harsh words that hurt others' hearts, and engaging in worldly conversations contrary to spirituality constitute Vachan-Duspraṇidhāna. Just as it is crucial to avoid mental anxieties during Samayik, it is equally important to refrain from misusing speech.

**Kay-Duspraṇidhāna:** Similar to the mind and speech, the body should also remain disciplined, attentive, and controlled during Samayik. One should avoid actions that could lead to violence or other sins.

**Samayik-Smriti-Akaraṇatā:** While Samayik is a lifelong practice, a dedicated time of 48 minutes has been set aside for its practice, as previously mentioned. When the devotee is engaged in Samayik, they should be fully aware and attentive, remembering that they are in Samayik. This means avoiding any mental, verbal, or physical actions that are not in accordance with Samayik. These lapses are transgressions of Samayik, rooted in negligence, unawareness, or carelessness.

**Samayik-Anvasthit-Karaṇatā:** "Avashthit" means being situated appropriately. Doing otherwise is "Anvasthit." During Samayik, one should never be in an unstable or disorganized state. Performing Samayik intermittently, not doing it at all, or leaving before the designated time are indicators of an unstable and erratic life. Such individuals fail in their Samayik practice and also fail to progress in their worldly life. Completing the Samayik vow before the designated time is the main essence of this transgression.

**Transgressions of Desavakashik Vrat:**

**[54]** The Shramanopasaka should be aware of the five transgressions of the Desavakashik Vrat and avoid them. These are:

* **Ānayan-prayoga:** Bringing something for personal use.
* **Preshya-prayoga:** Sending something for personal use.
* **Shabdānupāt:** Engaging in unnecessary conversation.
* **Rūpānupāt:** Engaging in unnecessary visual interaction.
* **Bahi:pudgal-prakshepa:** Throwing away external objects. 

Page #97:
---------------------------
##  [56]
[Upasakadasanga Sutra Discussion]

The word "Deshavakashik" is formed by combining the words "Desha" and "Avakash". Here, "Desha" means a part or a region. "Avakash" means to go or to make an effort to do something. To restrict oneself to a particular region is the "Deshavakashik" vow. In the sixth "Dik" vow, the direction-related quantity or limit is set for life. Reducing it for a day and night or for a shorter or longer period is the "Deshavakashik" vow. "Avakash" also means withdrawal. Therefore, the shortening of other vows for a specific time every day also falls under this vow. This should be understood more clearly as follows.

For example, a person observes the vow for twenty-four hours that they will not consume anything outside their house, will not perform any work outside, and will not consume the five senses outside the designated area. If they perform any work outside the designated area through a signal or by another person, they violate the vow they have taken. This is an excess of the "Deshavakashik" vow. It indicates the mental restlessness of the devotee and their instability towards the vow. This weakens the vow-observing attitude. The purpose of the vow is destroyed.

The explanation of the five excesses of this vow is as follows:

* **Aayan-Prayog:** Obtaining items from outside the designated area for use within the designated area through another person.
* **Preshya-Prayog:** Sending a servant, family member, etc., to perform tasks outside the designated area.
* **Shabdanupat:** Performing a task outside the designated area by signaling through words, such as coughing, sneezing, or making any other sound, to a neighbor, etc.
* **Rupanupat:** Signaling with hands, fingers, etc., without speaking, to get work done outside the designated area.
* **Bahihpudgal-Prakshep:** Throwing pebbles, etc., to signal others to get work done outside the designated area.

Although these actions do not hinder the literal observance of the vow, they certainly hinder the spirit of the vow. The practice of sadhana does not gain firmness, therefore, it is essential to avoid them.

The "Deshavakashik" vow is very important in limiting worldly desires, beginnings, etc., and gradually making life more self-centered. The ultimate goal of Jain philosophy is to be completely self-centered. It is one thing for those with very strong and clear self-power, but it is not possible for everyone to do so suddenly. Therefore, one should gradually reduce desires, cravings, and wishes. 

Page #98:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda]
[57
Sanvaran is to be done. This vow is very helpful in this practice. The excesses of the Poshadhopavas vow
55. After that, the Shramanopasaka should know the five excesses of the Poshadhopavas vow, he should not practice them. They are as follows:
Aapradilehi-Dushpradilehi-Shayasantharak, Appamargit-Dushpramargitshayasantharak, Aapradilehi-Dushpradilehi-Ucchaprastavnabhoomi, Appamargit-Dushpramargitucchaprastavnabhoomi, and Poshadhopavas Samyak Ananupalan Vivechan.
• In Poshadhopavas, there are two words: Poshad and Upavas. The meaning of Poshad is a special action that nourishes or strengthens Dharma. Upavas is made up of the prefix "up" and the word "vas". The meaning of "up" is near. The literal meaning of Upavas is the dwelling or state of being near the soul or the qualities of the soul. For some time, to achieve the proximity or closeness of the qualities of the soul, outwardness is negated. The most essential and important food in outwardness or body-mindedness is food. When the seeker is in self-absorption, he naturally becomes distant from external activities like food, etc. This is the theoretical explanation of Upavas. From a practical point of view, Upavas is the abandonment of food, drink, Khadim, and Swadim food for twenty-four hours, from sunrise to the next sunrise. The meaning of the combined practice of Poshad and Upavas is that the fasting devotee, for a limited time - twenty-four hours - breaks his connection with the house and lives in a certain place, almost like a Sadhu. He also fixes a place for sleeping, sitting, defecation, and urination. He keeps the necessary, limited equipment with care or caution, like a Sadhu, so that violence can be avoided.
One of the three aspirations of a Shravak or Upasaka is "Kya Naham Mude Bhavitta Pavvaissami" - When will the time come in my life when I will become a monk and be ordained? This vow is helpful in nourishing and developing this aspiration or high feeling. This is a practical form of the practice of Shraman-sadhana. Just as a Shraman is aware and careful in every tendency of his life, so too does the Upasaka in this vow.
Generally, these four things are the main things in the Poshadhopavas vow: 

Page #99:
---------------------------
##  58]
[Upasakadasangasutra (1) Abstinence from food, drink, and other edibles, (2) Abstinence from adornment of the body, clothing, bathing, etc., (3) Abstinence from sexual misconduct, (4) Abstinence from all sinful and harmful actions.
While Poshadhopavas can be performed at any time, in the Jain tradition, the second, fifth, eighth, eleventh, and fourteenth days of the lunar fortnight are recognized as special days. Among these, the eighth, fourteenth, and fortnightly days are considered particularly significant. The following are explanations of the transgressions of Poshadhopavas:
A-pratilikhit-dush-pratilikhit-shayya-sanstar-shayya means the place where Poshad is performed, and sanstar means a mat, rug, or other common bedding on which one can sleep. Using an unseen or carelessly seen place and bedding.
A-pramarjit-dush-pramarjit-shayya-sanstar-pramarjit means not cleaned or carelessly cleaned place and bedding.
A-pratilikhit-dush-pratilikhit-uchchar-prastavana-bhoomi-unseen or carelessly seen places for defecation and urination.
Poshadhopavas-samyak-an-nupalan-not properly observing Poshadhopavas as prescribed.
The Upasak should avoid these transgressions. Yatha-sanvibhag-vrat-atichar
56. Tayanantaram cha nan ahasanvibhagas sa manovasaena panch aiyara janiyavva, na samariyavva, tan jaha-sachitt-nikkhevanaya, sachitt-pehanaya, kalaik-kame, paravavase, machchariya.
Thereafter, the Shraman Upasak should know the five transgressions of the Yatha-sanvibhag-vrat, and should not commit them. They are as follows:
Sachitt-nikkhepanata, Sachitt-pidhan, Kalaatikram, Paravyapadesh, and Matsarita. Discussion
Yatha-sanvibhag means the proper division of food, drink, clothing, etc., and giving a portion of these authorized items to a Muni or a worthy recipient of good character. This vrat is also called Atithi-sanvibhag, which means giving to a virtuous guest or ascetic whose arrival date or day is not fixed.
This is a very noble and essential duty of a householder. It develops generosity, and brings out one's inner qualities.
The five transgressions of this vrat are based on the idea that the Upasak should give with... 

Page #100:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

**[59]** The [59] transgressions should always be avoided with zeal, they should not be diminished. Their explanation is as follows:

**Saccitta-nikshepana:**  To place objects fit for consumption by an unattached, inanimate, and restrained person in a place where they are mixed with attached, animate things like grains, with the intention of not giving them as charity. Or to mix attached objects with objects fit for consumption. By doing so, the ascetic cannot accept them. This is a deceitful act of not giving charity, not by saying it out loud, but by behavior.

**Saccitta-pidhana:** To cover an unattached object with an attached object with the intention of not giving it as charity, so that the restrained person cannot accept it.

**Kalatikram:** To transgress or violate time. To show a willingness to give charity by delaying the time of giving it. The ascetic or guest who arrives after the time has passed does not take food because their meal has already been taken. This is false hospitality. The person doing this knows in their heart that they will not have to give charity or food, their word will also be kept, and thus they will be able to perform hospitality without actually doing anything.

**Paravyapadesha:** To claim one's own object as belonging to someone else with the intention of not giving it.

**Matsarita:** To give food, etc., out of envy or jealousy. The meaning of envy here is that when someone sees that someone else has given such a donation, they think, "I am not much less than them, I should also give." There is no feeling of charity in this act, but a feeling of ego. Some have interpreted Matsarita as meaning stinginess or miserliness. According to this, being stingy in giving charity falls under this transgression. In some places, Matsarita has also been interpreted as meaning anger. According to them, giving charity or food out of anger is a transgression.

**Transgressions of Maranantic-Sanlekhana**

**[57]**  The five transgressions of the last [57] Maranantic-Sanlekhana-Joushana-Aradhana should be known and not practiced. They are:

* **Ihaloka-Ashansaprayoga:**  The use of hope for this world.
* **Paraloka-Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for the next world.
* **Jiviya-Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for life.
* **Marana-Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for death.
* **Kama-Bhoga-Ashansaprayoga:** The use of hope for sensual pleasures.

**Discussion**

According to Jain philosophy, the ultimate goal of life is to attain the true nature of the soul. The journey of spiritual practice is to progress in this direction by diminishing the coverings of karma that have come upon it. The body is useful in this. The worldly activities that are accomplished through the body are incidental, from a spiritual perspective... 

Page #101:
---------------------------
[60]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
The true use of the body is to follow the path of restraint and the root of non-violence. The Upasaka or Sadhaka takes care of his body because it is an aid in his religious practices. No one remains young forever, nor healthy, nor robust. The young become old, the healthy become sick, and the robust become weak. A time comes when the body itself needs the support of others for its sustenance. Due to illness and weakness, the individual becomes unable to perform religious activities. In such a situation, enthusiasm in the mind begins to decrease, weakness sets in, thoughts become impure, and life becomes a burden. The burden has to be carried. Why should a wise Sadhaka do this?
Jain philosophy provides a path for the Sadhaka. The Sadhaka abandons the feeling of protecting the body with peace and firmness. For this, he gives up food and drink and, in solitude or a sacred place, contemplates the self and ascends to a higher level of emotions. This vow is called Sanleshana. The commentator Abhaydeva Suri has defined Sanleshana as the thinning of the body and the passions. Beyond Sanleshana are two more words, Joshana and Aradhana. Joshana means to consume with pleasure. Aradhana means to follow or to put into practice, that is, to follow the Sanleshana vow with joy. There are two more adjectives, Apaschima and Maranantik. Apaschima means final or last, after which there is nothing left to do in this life. Maranantik means the Aradhana that continues until death. In this vow, there is not only the renunciation of food for life, but the Sadhaka also abandons worldly and otherworldly desires. He becomes so absorbed in self-delight that he rises above the desire for life and death. He does not desire to live for a while longer, nor does he fear death, nor does he yearn for it to come quickly so that the body may end and the suffering may cease. When death comes, he accepts it peacefully, with a natural feeling. How pure, elevated, and spacious this state of mind is from a spiritual perspective.
The excesses that have been conceived for this vow are based on the idea that the Sadhaka's virtuous conduct should not be hindered in any way.
_ The explanation of the excesses is as follows:
Ihalok-Ashansaprayog - Desire for worldly pleasures or comforts, such as, "I will become a king, wealthy, and prosperous after death."
Paralok-Ashansaprayog - Desire for the pleasures to be obtained in the otherworldly heaven, such as, "I will attain heaven after death and enjoy the unparalleled pleasures there."
Jivit-Ashansaprayog - Desire to live due to greed for praise, appreciation, fame, glory, etc., or fear of death.
Maran-Ashansaprayog - Desire to die quickly, considering the hunger, thirst, and other physical discomforts caused by austerity as suffering, thinking that these sufferings will soon be over. 

Page #102:
---------------------------
First Study: Gathapati Ananda]
[61 Desire for Enjoyment-Praise-Application: To desire to enjoy worldly and otherworldly words, forms, tastes, smells, and touch-based sensory pleasures - to have a feeling that such enjoyable objects will be obtained by me.
In this final period of practice, it is completely inappropriate for the above thoughts to come to mind. This hinders inner purity. The purity of the practitioner who has embarked on the path of practice for the sake of the pure and great goal is diminished by this. Therefore, the practitioner is expected to be very vigilant in this situation.
Thus, to embrace death itself with a high spirit of renunciation, forbearance, and spirituality is called death-festival in Jain scriptures. This is truly a very strange and commendable situation. On the one hand, it is seen that even a man who is worn out by many diseases, taking his last breath, wants to live, groans to live, while on the other hand, this practitioner, completely immersed in equanimity, rises above the desire for life and death. Those who do not understand sometimes start calling it suicide. Why do they forget that suicide is done by someone who is driven by violent mental impulses like anger, sorrow, grief, attachment, etc., who sees no support in life, who sees only darkness everywhere. This is a disgusting form of weakness of the soul. Sanlekhana-preceded fasting unto death is not the killing of the soul, but its development, upliftment, and elevation, where the practitioner rises far above lust, anger, attachment, hatred, and delusion. Acquisition by Joy
58. Therefore, the Saman, the Bhagavan Mahavira, in the end, rejects the five poisons, the seven virtues, the twelve kinds of worldly dharma, and the worldly dharma. The Saman, having rejected the worldly dharma, bows down to the Bhagavan Mahavira, salutes him. Having bowed down and saluted him, he says this:
_ "O Venerable Sir! It is not fitting for me to accept food, food-related things, or food-related possessions, or to be honored or saluted, or to be touched or embraced by someone who is not pure, or to eat, drink, chew, or suck, or to give or receive anything, or to be involved in any kind of royal, communal, forceful, divine, or guru-related affairs, or to be involved in financial matters. It is fitting for me, the Saman, the Niggantha, the naked one, to live by accepting only what is necessary for my existence, such as food, drink, chewing, sucking, clothes, blankets, towels, beds, fruits, vegetables, seeds, and medicines, and to accept only what is necessary for my existence.
He accepts this bitter and painful acquisition, having accepted it, he asks questions, having asked questions, he clarifies doubts, having clarified doubts, he bows down to the Bhagavan Mahavira with great respect, having bowed down, he departs from the two-fold worldly life, having departed from the two-fold worldly life, he...

Page #103:
---------------------------
[62]
a [Upasakadasangasutra] When the merchant went to the city, when he was at home, he returned. Upon returning, he told his wife Sivananada, "Devanupriya! I have heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. That Dharma is dear to me, very dear to me, and pleasing to me. Devanupriya! You go to Bhagavan Mahavira, pay your respects to him, (offer salutations, honor him, respect him, he is auspicious, he is prosperous, he is a Deva, he is the embodiment of knowledge), perform Paryupasana, and accept the twelve types of householder Dharma, which are the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata."

Then Anand, the head of the family, accepted the twelve types of Shravaka-Dharma, which are the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata, from Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. After accepting, he bowed to Bhagavan Mahavira and said to him, "Bhagavan! From today onwards, I will not pay respects to, offer salutations to, or engage in conversation with men associated with other Sanghas, other than the Anyayuthika-Nirgrantha Dharma-Sangha, their Devas, or the Chaityas they have adopted and accepted. I will not offer them food, drink, or other edible items, such as rice, bread, milk, fruits, nuts, or sweets. I will not offer them anything that is meant for the mouth, such as betel nut or mouthwash. This is not permissible for me, according to Dharma. This is not something I will do. However, I will make exceptions for the orders or requests of kings, communities, or specific democratic governments, for the sake of my livelihood, or in the face of danger.

It is permissible for me to offer Shramans and Nirgranthas food, drink, edible items, clothing, bowls, blankets, foot-cloths, mats, beds, lodging, grass for bedding, herbs, and medicines. This is something I will do.

Anand accepted this vow of non-attachment. He then asked Bhagavan questions. After asking his questions, he received their meaning and explanation. After receiving the explanation, he bowed to Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira three times. After bowing, he left from there, from the Chaitya called Duutipalasha. He went to the city of Vanijyagram, where his home was. Upon arriving, he told his wife Sivananada, "Devanupriya! I have heard the Dharma from Shraman Bhagavan. That Dharma is dear to me, very dear to me, and pleasing to me. Devanupriya! You go to Bhagavan Mahavira, pay your respects to him, (offer salutations, honor him, respect him, he is auspicious, he is prosperous, he is a Deva, he is the embodiment of knowledge), perform Paryupasana, and accept the twelve types of householder Dharma, which are the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata." 

Page #104:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Joy of the Layman

[63 Discussions]

The twelve vows of a lay person are divided into five anuvratas and seven shikshavrata. Anuvrata is the fundamental vow. Shikshavrata is for their nourishment, enhancement, and development. The meaning of shiksha is practice. These vows are particularly useful in bringing stability to the practice or sadhana of anuvratas.

From a linguistic perspective, these seven (shiksha) vows have been divided in two ways. They are all called shikshavrata, as mentioned earlier. The first three - anarthadandaviramana, digvrata, and upabhog-paribhog-parimana gunavrata - and the last four - samayaik, deshavakashik, poshadhopavas, and atithisanvibhaga - are called shikshavrata.

The reason for calling them gunavrata is generally that they are helpful in the qualitative development of anuvratas or they increase the character-based qualities of the practitioner. The next four are mainly practice-oriented, so the word "shiksha" is naturally associated with them in a descriptive sense.

Generally speaking, both gunavrata and shikshavrata are helpful in the practice of anuvratas, so it is appropriate to call all seven shikshavrata in a broad sense.

The order of the seven shikshavrata, as found in the औपपातिक सूत्र (Aupapatik Sutra) etc., is mentioned here. The order is slightly different in Acharya Umaswati's Tattvarth Sutra. In Tattvarth Sutra, the order of these vows is dig, desh, anarth-dand-virati, samayaik, poshadhopavas, upabhog-paribhog-parimana, and atithi-sanvibhaga. There, they are not called shikshavrata, but it is only said that the lay person is also endowed with these vows. However, even with a slight difference in order, there is no difference in meaning.

After accepting the twelve vows of a lay person, Anand made a special resolution. Behind this resolution is the desire to remain strong and stable in the principles of dharma that he had accepted with understanding and discernment. Therefore, he does not want to maintain contact with people from other religious groups, so that no such occasion arises in life that could lead to deviation.

One might ask, if Anand had accepted the principles of dharma with thought and understanding, why was he so apprehensive? This seems reasonable on the surface, but let's delve deeper. The human mind is very emotional. Emotionality sometimes overshadows reason, causing a person to be swept away by it, which can shake their true faith. This is the reason for Anand's resolution.

The word chaitya used in this context is somewhat controversial. The word chaitya is polysemous. The well-known

1.  दिग्देशानर्थदण्डविरतिसामायिकपोषधोपवासोपभोगपरिभोगपरिमाणाऽतिथिसंविभागव्रतसंपन्नश्च।
    Tattvarth Sutra 7.16

Page #105:
---------------------------
## Translation:

[64]
Jain Acharya Pujya Shri Jaymalji Maharaj researched one hundred and twelve meanings of the word "Chaitya".
Linguists speculate that in ancient times, there was a tradition of planting a tree in memory of a deceased person at the place where their body was cremated. This practice was prevalent even outside India. The tree planted at the site of the "chiti" or "chita" (pyre) came to be known as "Chaitya". Over time, this tradition evolved. Instead of a tree, a structure was built as a memorial. An image of a worldly deity or Yaksha was installed in this structure. Thus, it took the form of a temple or a place of worship. It came to be known as "Chaitya". Gradually, the word "Chaitya" became synonymous with a general temple.
[Upasak Dasangasutra]

One meaning of "Chaitya" is "knowledge". Another meaning is "Yati" or "Sadhu" (ascetic). Acharya Kundakunda has used the word "Chaitya" in these meanings in the "Ast-Prabhrit".

The "abhigraha" (vow) that Anand accepted, which prohibits bowing or saluting other-sect-adopted "Chaityas" and engaging in conversation with them, should be understood as referring to those Sadhus who have abandoned their faith in Jainism and embraced another philosophy, and who have been accepted by the followers of that other philosophy. Another meaning could be those Sadhus who have faith in another philosophy but have come to believe in Jainism, but have not abandoned their previous attire, i.e., they are still associated with another sect or group through their attire. Both these types of individuals are not worthy of being saluted by a Shravak (lay follower). Firstly, they are essentially devoid of Sadhutva (qualities of an ascetic). Secondly, although they are good from a qualitative perspective, it is not appropriate to salute them from a behavioral perspective. This has a negative impact on ordinary Shravaks and increases the risk of "mithyatva" (false belief).

As mentioned above, the prohibition against bowing, saluting, etc., to Sadhus of other faiths is primarily from a spiritual or religious perspective. It is not forbidden to do so as a matter of etiquette, good behavior, etc. In life, individuals have to perform many social duties, which are based on social norms or traditions.

59. Therefore, that Sivanandi, being pleased with Anand's conduct as a Samana (ascetic), was happy, her mind filled with joy, drinking in the supreme bliss, being overwhelmed with happiness, and with folded hands, bowing her head, said, "Thus, Sami!" Anand, the Samana, listened to this with humility.

Anand, the Samana, then addressed the people of Kodumbiyapura, saying:
1. Jayadhwaj, page 573-76
2. "Buddham Jam Bohanto Appaanam Chedayai Annam Cha.
Panchamahavvaayasuddham Naanamaayam Jaan Chediharam." 

Page #106:
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Ananda

[65] "Quickly, O Devānupiya! Bring the chariot adorned with fine ornaments, with horses of equal height, with hooves like those of a lion, with horns of many colors, with a golden necklace and a silver bell hanging from its neck, with a nose ring made of fine gold thread mixed with a thin string of silk, with a crest made of blue lotuses, with two young bulls pulling it, with a net of many jewels and golden bells, with a fine wooden yoke, straight, excellent and beautiful, and with the best signs. Know that this chariot is for religious purposes. Bring it quickly, and when you have brought it, inform me that it is ready."

The servants, hearing these words, were filled with joy and said, "Yes, Master!" They bowed their heads and listened attentively. Then, quickly, they brought the chariot adorned with fine ornaments, and when they had brought it, they informed their master that it was ready.

Then, the wife of the Shramanopasaka Ananda, Shivananda, bathed, performed her daily rituals, wore her finest clothes and ornaments, and adorned herself with auspicious markings. She then went to the city, where she met the Shramanopasaka Ananda, who was sitting on a chariot adorned with many jewels and surrounded by a circle of disciples. She bowed to him and offered him her respects. Then, she sat down at a distance, listening attentively and offering her respects. 

Page #107:
---------------------------
[66]
The Upasakadasangasutra, having received the command of its master, was presented like a chariot of great merit, drawn by swift oxen, for which an order had been given.
Shivananda, the wife of Ananda, bathed, performed her daily rituals, applied kohl to her eyes for the sake of beauty, adorned her forehead with a tilak, performed auspicious rites with sandalwood, saffron, yogurt, and rice grains to remove sins, bad dreams, and other blemishes, wore pure, fine, auspicious garments, and adorned her body with a few, but precious, ornaments. Surrounded by a group of maidservants, she mounted the chariot of great merit. Having mounted, she came to the city of Vanijyagrama, to the place where the Duutipalasha Chaitya was located, and dismounted from the chariot of great merit. Having dismounted, surrounded by a group of maidservants, she went to where the Lord Mahavira was seated. Going there, she circumambulated three times, paid homage and prostrated, stood facing the Lord, neither too close nor too far, bowed her head, with a desire to listen, folded her hands in humility, and began to pay homage.
60. Then the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira preached the Dharma to Shivananda and the assembled congregation (group of people).
61. Then Shivananda, having heard the Dharma from the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, and having held it in her heart, became extremely happy. She accepted the householder's Dharma (Shravak Dharma). Having accepted it, she mounted the same chariot of great merit, and having mounted, she went in the same direction from which she had come. The future of Ananda
62. "Bhanta!" said Gotama, bowing and prostrating to the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. Having bowed and prostrated, he said, "Bhanta! How long will Ananda remain in the Shraman's abode, until he attains the state of a Deva (god)?"
"Gotama," said the Shraman, "Ananda will remain in the Shraman's abode for a long time, and will attain the state of a Shraman's abode. Having attained it, he will (for eleven years, he will fast for a month, cleanse himself, and abstain from food for a period of time, and will attain the state of Samadhi, and will remain in that state for a period of time) in the Sohamme Kalpa, in the Arunaabha Vimana, he will be reborn as a Deva (god). There, he will not...
1. See Sutra number 11. 2. See Sutra number 12. 3. See Sutra number 12. 

Page #108:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Ananda

[67. There are four parables established for the gods who have attained liberation, and there are four parables established for the happiness of the monk and the attainment of liberation.
Gautama asked the Lord Mahavira, "Bhanta! Is the monk Ananda capable of becoming a monk and a renunciate?"
The Lord said, "Gautama! This is not possible. The monk Ananda will follow the path of the Shramanopasaka, the Shravaka, and the Dharma for many years (he will diligently follow the eleven virtues of the Upasaka, ultimately he will perform a one-month Sanlekhana and sixty meals - a one-month fast, he will perform Alochana Pratikramana - criticism of known and unknown faults, and he will leave his body in a state of Samadhi at the appropriate time). He will be born as a god in the Saudharma-kalpa, in the Saudharma devlok, in the Arunabha vimana. There, the lifespan of many gods is four Palyopama (a specific measure of time). The lifespan of the monk Ananda will also be four Palyopama. Discussion
The word 'Palyopama' used here is a special, very long period of time. It is used extensively in Jain literature. In the present Agam, it is used to indicate the celestial lifespan of the Shravakas in each study.
The meaning of Paly or Pall is a well or a very large storehouse of grain. Because of the calculation of time based on it or its comparison, this period of time is called 'Palyopama'.
There are three types of Palyopama: 1. Uddhar-Palyopama, 2. Adha-Palyopama, 3. Kshetra-Palyopama. Imagine an Uddhar-Palyopama, a large storehouse of grain or a well that is one yojana (four kos) long, one yojana wide, and one yojana deep. Take the very small pieces of hair of a newborn yogalic child who is seven days old, and fill that storehouse or well tightly with them. The filling should be so dense that fire cannot burn it, the army of a Chakravarti can pass over it without a single particle moving, and the flow of the Ganges can pass over it without any effect. From this filled well, one hair-piece is taken out at a time. The amount of time it takes to empty the well is called Uddhar-Palyopama. Uddhar means to take out. Because of the taking out or removal of hair, it is called Uddhar-Palyopama. This is considered a numerical measure of time.
There are two types of Uddhar-Palyopama: subtle and practical. The above description is of the practical Uddhar-Palyopama. The subtle Uddhar-Palyopama is as follows:
In the practical Uddhar-Palyopama, the hair of the yogalic child that was used to fill the well, each piece is divided into countless invisible parts. From these subtle parts, the previously mentioned well...
]
Page #109:
---------------------------
[68]
The **Upasakadasangasutra** is filled to the brim, like a well. When it is filled, one section is removed from the well at a time. The time it takes for the well to become completely empty is called the **Sukshma Uddharapalyopam**. This time period is considered to be a countless number of years.

**Adha-palyopam** is a local term that means time. The **palyopam** mentioned in the context of the Agam refers to this **Adha-palyopam**. Its calculation is as follows: A well filled with strands of hair from a **Yogalik** (a being with a lifespan of countless years) is emptied one strand at a time every hundred years. The time it takes for the well to become completely empty is called **Adha-palyopam**. This time period is considered to be a countless number of years.

**Adha-palyopam** is of two types: **Sukshma** and **Vyavaharik**. The one described here is the **Vyavaharik Adha-palyopam**. Just as in the **Sukshma Uddhar-palyopam**, where countless invisible strands of hair from a **Yogalik** infant are considered, similarly, here too, the well is filled with countless invisible strands of hair. One strand is removed every hundred years. The time it takes for the well to become completely empty is considered to be a countless number of years.

**Kshetra-palyopam**: Even when the well or the large heap of wealth is filled with strands of hair from a **Yogalik**, there are still spaces of air between the strands. No matter how small the strands are, they are still material, while air is immaterial. It is difficult to imagine these spaces of air between the strands in a gross way, but it is possible to understand it through a subtle perspective. This can be understood through an example: Imagine a large granary filled with gourds. It appears to be full, with no space left. However, if lemons are added, they can fit in because there is space between the gourds. Even after filling it with lemons, there is still subtle space left, which is not visible from the outside. If mustard seeds are added, they can also fit in. Even after filling it with mustard seeds, there is still subtle space left. If river sand is added, it can also fit in.

Another example is a wall. A plastered wall appears to have no space, but we can still drive nails and pegs into it. If there were truly no space in the wall, this would not be possible. There is space in the wall, but it is not visible in a gross way.

The space between the strands of hair from a **Yogalik** mentioned in the context of **Kshetra-palyopam** can be understood in the same way. Imagine removing each of these spaces of air that touch the strands of hair from a **Yogalik** one at a time. The time it takes for all the spaces of air to be removed and the well to become completely empty is called **Kshetra-palyopam**. 

Page #110:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

[69 The time it takes for a [Jain] being to be born is called a Kshetra-Pal-Yopam. Its time-magnitude is countless Utsarpini-Avasarpini.
Kshetra-Pal-Yopam is of two types: practical and subtle. The above discussion is of practical Kshetra-Pal-Yopam.
Subtle-Kshetra-Pal-Yopam is as follows: - If one imagines taking out one-one region at a time from all the sky-regions that are touched and untouched by the hair strands of the compound filled in the well, and in the time it takes to empty the well from all the sky-regions, that time-magnitude is Subtle-Kshetra-Pal-Yopam. Its time-magnitude is also countless Utsarpini-Avasarpini. Its time is countless times more than practical Kshetra-Pal-Yopam.
Anuyogadwar Sutra 138-140 and Pravachan-Saroddhara-Dwar 148 have a detailed discussion of Pal-Yopam.
63. Then the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, having left the Vaaniya-grama, the city, the Du-ti-palasha Chaitya, went to other Janapadas for some time.
64. Then Ananda became a Shramana-Upasaka. He had understood the nature of Jiva, Ajeeva, etc. substances well, [he knew the difference between punya and papa, he was well acquainted with Aastrav, Sanvar, Nirjara, Kriya, Adhikarana, the basis of action, Bandha and Moksha, he was self-reliant, not wanting the help of anyone else, he was not transgressed by the teachings of the Nirgrantha by the Devas, Asuras, Nagas, Suparna, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Garuda, Gandharva, Mahoraga, etc. Devas, he was a Nirgrantha, a Pavayana, he was free from doubts, he was free from doubts, he desired liberation, he had attained, he had been deeply immersed, he had been questioned, he had been understood, he had been decided, he was free from the attachment of the body, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind, the senses, the mind
Page #111:
---------------------------
70]
[Upasakadasangasutra
He was not to be swayed, unshaken in the Nirgrantha discourse, free from doubt, without any desire other than self-elevation, free from hesitation and doubt, having attained the true essence of the acquired Dharma, having accepted it, having established it through inquiry or questioning, having made it his own, having definitively assimilated it, and filled with love and devotion for Dharma to the very bone and marrow. He had the firm conviction that this Nirgrantha discourse was the essence and purpose, the ultimate truth, and everything else was meaningless and purposeless. 'Usi-phalihe' refers to a raised platform, with doors that were always open for the virtuous. 'Avangu duvare' means open doors, signifying that his doors were always open for charity. 'Chiyatt' means that he had renounced entering the inner chambers and outer houses of others, or that he was so trustworthy that even his entry into inner chambers and outer houses was pleasing and did not arouse suspicion. He was living a righteous life, observing the [joyful] nourishing fasts on the fourteenth, eighth, new moon, and full moon days, providing the Shraman Nirgranthas with 'prasauk' - inanimate or lifeless, 'eshniya' - acceptable to them, blameless food, drink, edibles, palatable food, clothes, vessels, blankets, foot-wear, medicine, remedies, 'pratiharik' - things to be returned, cloth, 'bajot' - a type of cloth, lodging, grass for bedding, etc.]

65. Tae nan sa siva-nanda bhariya samanovasia jaya java' padhila bhemani viharai.
Shivananda, the wife of Ananda, became a Shramanopasika. She lived a righteous life, [having attained true knowledge, providing the Shraman Nirgranthas with 'prasauk' and 'eshniya' things].

66. Tae nan anandasy samanovasagass uccava-ehim silavva-yaguna-veraman-pacchakkhana-posaho-vavasehim appaanam bhavemanasss coddasa samvaccharain vaikkantanai. Panna-rasamass samvaccharass antara vattamanasss annaya kayahi puvvaratta-avarattakala-samayansi dhamma-jagariyam jagaramanasss imeyaruve ajjhatthie, cintie, patthie, manogae sankappe samuppajjiththa - evam khalu aham vaniyagame nayare bahunam raisar java' san-yass vi nan kudumbass java (medhi, pamanam, ) adhare, tan ae-enan vakkhevenam aham no sanchaami samanasss bhagava-o mahavirass antiyam dhamma-pannatti- uvasampadjitanam viharitte. Tan seyam khalu mama-m kallan java (pa-upphabayae rayanie full-uppalakamal-komal-ummi-liy-ammi aham pandure pahae ratta-sogappa-gas-kinsu-y-suy-muh-gunjaddhara-gasari-se, kamala-agarasandabohae, utthi-yammi sure sahasra-rassi-mmi dinayare teyasa) jalate viulan asan-paan-kha-imasa-im-an jaha purano, java (uvakkha-davetta, mitta-nai-niyagasana- sambandhi-parijanam amantetta, tan mitta-nai-niyam-sayana- sambandhi-parijanam viulena-m
1. See Sutra - number 64. 2. See Sutra - number 5. 

Page #112:
---------------------------
First Study: The Story of Ananda

He who would honor and respect with food, drink, and adornments of fragrant flowers and garlands, would place his eldest son in charge of his family, friends, relatives, and servants, and would then, after informing his friends, relatives, and servants, go to the assembly of the Kolla people and stay in the Posahasala, having received the Dharma-Pannatti from the Bhagavan Mahavira. Thus, he would fulfill his obligations. He would fulfill his obligations, just as a large field is filled with flowers, and he would honor and respect with fragrant flowers and garlands. Having honored and respected, he would place his eldest son in charge of his family, friends, relatives, and servants, and would then say to his son, "My son, I have many things to do in the city of Vanijyagrama, and I am not able to follow the Dharma-Pannatti of the Bhagavan Mahavira. Therefore, I am leaving you in charge of the family, and I will go to the assembly of the Kolla people and stay in the Posahasala, having received the Dharma-Pannatti from the Bhagavan Mahavira."

After that, the Shramanopasaka Ananda spent fourteen years cultivating his soul through various vows, virtues, restraints, renunciations, and fasts. When half of the fifteenth year had passed, one night after midnight, while engaged in Dharma-Jagaran, Ananda had a thought, a desire, a feeling, or a resolve: "In the city of Vanijyagrama, there are many Mandalik Narapatis, wealthy and influential men, and I have many things to ask them and seek their advice. I am the [head, leader, and] support of my entire family. Because of these distractions and obstacles, I am not able to fully follow the Dharma-Pannatti, the Dharma-teaching, that I have received from the Bhagavan Mahavira. Therefore, it is best for me to [wait until tomorrow morning, when the blue and other lotuses have blossomed in their beautiful forms, when the sun has risen, illuminating the world with its brilliance, and the red Ashoka, Kinshuku, parrot's beak, and half-Dhungachi-colored red glow has awakened the lotus forest, and the sun, with its thousand rays, has risen, illuminating the world with its brilliance], prepare a large amount of food, drink, and delicacies, and invite my friends, relatives, family members, and servants to eat. I will honor and respect them with clothes, fragrant substances, garlands, and ornaments, and I will place my eldest son in charge of the family, friends, relatives, and servants." 

Page #113:
---------------------------
[72]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Parijan] And after asking his eldest son and obtaining his permission, I will transcribe the Pauṣadha-śālā of the Jñātakul located in Kolläka-sanniveśa and follow the conduct in accordance with the Dharma-prajñapti accepted by Bhagavan Mahāvīra. Thus, Ānanda contemplated with Samyak-cintana. Doing so, on the next day, he fed his friends, caste members, etc. Afterwards, he honored them with abundant flowers, clothes, fragrant substances, garlands, and ornaments. Thus, after honoring them, he called his eldest son in front of them. Calling him, he said to him, explaining everything as he had thought, and his social status and reputation, etc., "Son! In the city of Vāṇijyagrāma, I am associated with many Māṇḍalika kings, wealthy men, etc., [due to this distraction, I am unable to perform proper Dharma-upāsana in accordance with the Dharma-prajñapti accepted by Śramaṇa Bhagavan Mahāvīra]. Therefore, it is auspicious for me at this time that you be established as the foundation, proof, basis, and support of my family, and I [after asking all of these, my friends, caste members, family members, relatives, and you, I will transcribe the Pauṣadha-śālā of the Jñātakul located in Kolläka-sanniveśa, and in accordance with the Dharma-prajñapti accepted by Bhagavan Mahāvīra] will engage in proper Dharma-upāsana.
67. Then, the eldest son of Śramaṇa-upāsaka Ānanda accepted his father's words with great humility, saying, "As you command."
68. Then, Śramaṇa-upāsaka Ānanda established his eldest son in his place in the family in front of his friends, caste members, etc., and after establishing him, he said to the people present, "Great ones! [Devanupriyo] From today, none of you should ask me anything about various tasks [reasons, deliberations, family problems, confidential matters, matters to be considered in solitude, decisions made, and mutual interactions], nor should you give me advice, nor should you prepare or bring me food, drink, food, or delicacies."
69. Then, Śramaṇa-upāsaka Ānanda asked his eldest son, and after asking him, he left his house. After leaving, he went out of the city of Vāṇijyagrāma through the middle. After going out,
1. See Sutra number 66. 

Page #114:
---------------------------
First Study:  Gathapati Ananda]
[73 When the Kollas were assembled, when the Nayakulas were present, when the Posha-Sala was available, then he went there, having gone there, he cleaned the Posha-Sala, having cleaned it, he marked the place for excretion and urination, having marked it, he spread a bed of Darbha and Kusha, having spread it, he sat on it, having sat on it, he accepted the Posha in the Posha-Sala, having accepted the Posha, he practiced the final Dharma-Pannatti of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, having attained it.
Then Ananda took permission from his elder son, friends, caste people, etc. Having taken permission, he departed from his house. Having departed, he passed through the middle of the commercial town, where the Kollas were assembled, the known families and the Posha-Sala of the known families were present, he reached there. Having reached there, he cleaned the Posha-Sala, having cleaned it, he marked the place for excretion and urination, having marked it, he spread a bed of Darbha and Kusha, having spread it, he sat on it, having sat on it, he accepted the Posha in the Posha-Sala, having accepted the Posha, he practiced the Dharma-Pannatti, the religious teachings, accepted by the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, in accordance with the Dharma-Pannatti, he became engaged in meditation.
70. Then Ananda, having attained the Upasaka-Pratima, practiced it in the Samana-Vasaya. He first practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it.
• After that, the Samana-Upasaka Ananda accepted the Upasaka-Pratima. He first practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it.
71. Then Ananda, having attained the Upasaka-Pratima, practiced it in the Samana-Vasaya. He first practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it.
• After that, the Samana-Upasaka Ananda accepted the Upasaka-Pratima. He first practiced the Upasaka-Pratima, the Aha-Sutta, the Aha-Kapa, the Aha-Magga, the Aha-Tacha, the right cause, he embraced it, he protected it, he adorned it, he crossed it, he praised it, he worshipped it.
The Samana-Upasaka Ananda then worshipped the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh Pratima. [He embraced them, protected them, purified them, and completed them in a beautiful way, in accordance with the scriptures, the rules, the path, and the truth.
Discussion
The present Sutra mentions the worship of eleven Upasaka-Pratima by Ananda. The Upasaka-Pratima is a progressive development of the Dharma-aradhana of the householder, where the worshipper becomes absorbed in the excellent practice of a specific religious act. The word Pratima, while meaning symbol or reflection, also means standard or criterion. The practitioner, while being a symbol of something, is also a standard or criterion. 

Page #115:
---------------------------
## 74]
[Upasakdasanga Sutra]

The devotee becomes engrossed in the excellent observance of the rituals, where the ritual or conduct becomes his main goal. Its observance takes the form of an ideal example or standard. That is, he creates a situation through his practice, which others accept as a model of that conduct. This is the specific vow form.

The practitioner, holding onto his self-strength, progresses from the first to the second, the second to the third, the third to the fourth, and so on, in the worship of images. When he completes one image and accepts the next, he continues to follow the rules of the accepted image as well as the rules of the previous images. It does not happen that the rules of the next image are accepted and the previous ones are abandoned. This sequence continues until the end.

Acharya Abhaydeva Suri has shed light on these eleven images in his commentary. The relevant verses have also been quoted.

A brief analysis of the devotee's images is as follows:

1. **Darshan-Pratima:** Darshan means vision or faith. Vision or faith is the element that is most essential for the upliftment and development of the soul. If the vision is pure, there will be faith in truth, only then will the seeker be able to move successfully on the path of practice. If there is distortion, doubt, or instability in the vision, then the efforts made for self-development do not bear fruit.

Although the Shravak is generally of Samyakdrishti, in this image he worships Darshan or vision specifically. To keep it very stable and unwavering, he has firm faith in the path laid down by the Vitarag Devas, the Panchmahavratdhara Guru, and the Vitarag. He is eager in contemplation, reflection, and practice based on this.

The worshiper of Darshan-Pratima, the Shraman Upasak, observes the Niratichar of Samyaktva. There is no place for doubt, desire, etc. in its observance. He is so firm in his faith that even knowing various opinions and counter-opinions, he is not attracted to them. He keeps his faith, belief, or devotion very pure. His thinking and behavior are based on this.

The time for the worship of Darshan-Pratima is considered to be one month.

2. **Vrat-Pratima:** After the worship of Darshan-Pratima, the devotee worships Vrat-Pratima. In Vrat-Pratima, he observes the Niratichar of the five Anuvrats and also the three Ganvrats. He also accepts the four Shikshavrats, but he is unable to observe the Samayik and Deshavakashik Vrats properly. He is endowed with qualities like compassion, etc.

The time for the worship of this image is two months.

3. **Samayik-Pratima:** The seeker who worships Samyak Darshan and Vrats, worships Samayik... 

Page #116:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Gathapati Ananda

**[75] The image accepts and regularly performs Samayika three times a day. In this image, they observe Samayika and Desavakashika vows in their proper form, but they are unable to properly perform the Poshadhopavasa on special days like Ashtami, Chaturdashi, Amavasya, and Purnima.**

**The intention of this image is to worship the Samayika vow with mindfulness and awareness. The duration of its worship is three months.**

**4. Poshadapratima:  Moving forward from the first, second, and third images, the devotee accepts the Poshadapratima and fully observes the Poshadavrata on festival days like Ashtami and Chaturdashi. The duration of worship for this image is four months.**

**5. Kayotsargapratima: Kayotsarga means the renunciation of the body. The body remains with us throughout life, so the renunciation refers to letting go of attachment or fondness for it. In the Kayotsargapratima, the devotee detaches themselves from thoughts about the body, clothes, etc., and focuses on self-reflection. They perform Kayotsarga or meditation throughout the night on Ashtami and Chaturdashi. The duration of this image is one, two, or three days, up to a maximum of five months. It involves the renunciation of nighttime meals. During the day, they observe the Brahmacharya vow. At night, they engage in Abrahmacharya.**

**6. Brahmacharyapratima: In this image, Brahmacharya is fully observed. Unnecessary interaction with women, conversations, observing their adorned gestures, etc., are prohibited. The devotee also avoids adorned attire and actions. In this image, the devotee does not renounce conscious food. They consume conscious food if necessary. The duration of worship for this image is a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of six months.**

**[There is also a provision for accepting lifelong Brahmacharya in this image.]**

**7. Sachitaaharvarjanapratima: While following the aforementioned rules and observing complete Brahmacharya, the devotee in this image completely renounces conscious food, but they are unable to renounce the initial act of taking food. The ideal duration of worship for this image is seven months.**

**8. Swayam-Aarambh-Varjan-Pratima: While following all the aforementioned rules, the devotee in this image does not initiate or cause any harm. The only exception is that they do not renounce the act of initiating others for livelihood or sustenance.**

**The duration of worship for this image is a minimum of one, two, or three days, and a maximum of eight months.** 

Page #117:
---------------------------
## The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra

**9. Bhrtak-Preshyarambha-Varjan:** The Upasaka, following all the rules of the previous pratima, abandons the initiation in this pratima. That is, he does not initiate himself, nor does he get it done by others, but he does not abandon the permission to initiate. 

He does not abandon the food prepared for his purpose, he can take it. The minimum duration of worship for this pratima is one day, two days, or three days, and the best is nine months.

**10. Uddishta-Bhakta-Varjan:** The Upasaka, following the aforementioned rules, also abandons the food, etc., prepared for him in this pratima. He often removes himself from worldly activities. In that context, he does not give any orders or advice. He can only answer yes or no to the question of whether he knows something or not.

The worshiper of this pratima shaves his head with a razor, he also keeps a shikha (tuft of hair).

The duration of worship for this pratima is a minimum of one, two, or three days, and the best is ten months.

**11. Shramanabhoot-Pratima:** The practitioner, following all the aforementioned rules, makes himself almost like a Shraman or Sadhu in this pratima. All his actions are like a Shraman, with effort and awareness. He wears the attire of a Sadhu, keeps the same vessels, tools, etc. He shaves his head with a razor, if he has the tolerance or strength, he can also perform lunchan (a type of fasting). Like a Sadhu, he earns his livelihood through begging. The difference is that a Sadhu goes to everyone's house for alms, this Upasaka only goes to the homes of his relatives, because his attachment to them has not completely disappeared yet.

The minimum duration of worship for this pratima is one day, two days, or three days, and the best is eleven months.

It is called Shramanabhoot because although he is not in the role of a Shraman, he is almost like a Shraman.

**72. Tae Nan Se Anand Samanovasae Imenam Eyaruvenam Uralean, Viulean Payattenam, Paggahienam Tavokammenam Sukke Jav (Lukke, Nimmanse, Atthichammavanaddhe, Kidikidia Bhue, Kise) Dhamanisantae Jae.**

Thus, the Shraman Upasaka, with the accepted excellent, abundant, resource-appropriate effort and austerity in the form of Shravaka-Pratima, etc., has dried up his body of joy, [it has become rough, there is no flesh on it, only bones and skin remain, the bones clash and make noise], there is so much emaciation or weakness in the body that the protruding veins are visible. 

Page #118:
---------------------------
First Study: The Joy of the Monk Ananda]
[77
73. Then, the monk Ananda, while engaged in religious vigil, had this thought in his mind during the time of his previous existence: "Thus, I have become emaciated through this (excellent, abundant, vast, diligent, and strenuous practice of austerities, with a dry, lean, and thin body, with only bones and skin left, with bones rattling against each other, like the sound of a dry gourd).
I have this strength, vigor, and courage, and this faith, fortitude, and zeal. As long as I have this strength, faith, fortitude, and zeal, and as long as my religious teacher, the preacher of the Dharma, the Jina, the conqueror of passions, the auspicious ascetic, the Lord Mahavira, is alive, it is auspicious for me to accept the final, death-inducing Sanlekhana tomorrow at sunrise, to renounce food and drink, and to live in contemplation without desiring death.
Ananda thought thus. Thinking thus, he accepted the final, death-inducing Sanlekhana the next morning, renounced food and drink, and lived in contemplation without desiring death.
74. Then, the monk Ananda, through this auspicious end, auspicious outcome, and the shedding of the coverings, experienced the destruction of the karmas that obstruct knowledge. Just as one can see a field of five hundred yojanas in the salty ocean, so too, in the south
1. See Sutra - number 66.
2. See Sutra - number 66.
3.
A special epithet indicating the excellence of Lord Mahavira. 

Page #119:
---------------------------
[The Upasakadasangasutra
78]
He knows and sees the salt ocean in the south, five hundred yojanas in each direction, and the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara mountain in the north. He knows and sees the Saudharma Kalpa, the first heaven, in the upper direction, and the Lolupacyuta hell, which is eighty-four thousand years old, in the lower direction, in the Ratnaprabha earth.
After that, the Shramanopasaka Ananda, one day, with a good resolve, a good intention, and pure Leshyas, due to the contact of the Pudgala substance, the karma of Avaradhi-Jnana Avarana was destroyed, and Avaradhi-Jnana arose. As a result, he began to know and see the salt ocean in the east, west, and south directions, five hundred yojanas in each direction, the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara mountain in the north, the Saudharma Kalpa, the first heaven, in the upper direction, and the Lolupacyuta hell, which is eighty-four thousand years old, in the lower direction, in the Ratnaprabha earth.
Discussion
In this Sutra, the mention of pure Leshyas along with good resolve and good results in the context of the Shramanopasaka Ananda's attainment of Avaradhi-Jnana is significant. Leshyas are a unique element of Jain philosophy, which has been deeply analyzed. Leshyas refer to the results or thoughts of the soul arising from the contact of the Pudgala substance. The question may arise, how is it possible for the soul, which is conscious, to be affected by the Pudgala, which is inert? It is important to note that although the soul is completely different from the inert, in the state of Samsara, it has a deep connection with the inert Pudgala. Therefore, the results generated by the Pudgala cannot remain without affecting the soul. The Pudgalas that affect the results of the soul are called Dravya-Leshyas. The results that arise in the soul are called Bhava-Leshyas.
Dravya-Leshyas are Pudgalic in nature, therefore, color, smell, taste, and touch are accepted in them. The colors of Dravya-Leshyas are considered to be the basis for naming them. There are six Leshyas: Krishna-Leshya, Neel-Leshya, Kapoth-Leshya, Tejo-Leshya, Padma-Leshya, and Shukla-Leshya.
Krishna-Leshya has a color like kajal, a taste infinitely bitter than neem, a smell infinitely worse than the smell of a dead snake, and a touch infinitely rougher than the tongue of a cow.
Neel-Leshya has a color like sapphire, a taste infinitely sharper than ginger, a smell and touch like Krishna-Leshya.
Kapoth-Leshya has a color like the neck of a pigeon, a taste infinitely bitter than raw mango, a smell and touch like Krishna and Neel Leshya.
Tejo-Leshya has a color like Hingul or Sindur, a taste infinitely sweeter than ripe mango, a smell and touch like Krishna and Neel Leshya. 

Page #120:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

[79] The fragrance of sweet and fragrant flowers is infinitely more pleasant than the touch of butter, which is infinitely more delicate.
The color of Padma Leshya is yellow like turmeric, its taste is infinitely sweeter than honey, and its fragrance and touch are like Tejo Leshya.
The color of Shukla Leshya is white like a conch shell, its taste is infinitely sweeter than white sugar, and its fragrance and touch are like Tejo Leshya and Padma Leshya.
The color of Leshyas is based on the excellence and non-excellence of emotions. Krishna Leshya is indicative of extremely polluted emotions. As the pollution of emotions decreases, there is a difference in the categories. When the pollution of emotions generated by Krishna Leshya decreases slightly, the state of Neel Leshya arises, and when it decreases further, the state of Kapoth Leshya is formed. Krishna, Neel, and Kapoth, these three colors are indicative of non-excellent emotions. The next three colors are indicative of excellent emotions. The first three Leshyas are considered inauspicious and the next three are considered auspicious.

Just as the external environment, place, food, lifestyle, etc., have different effects on our mind, in the same way, it is not unnatural for different types of Pudgalas to have different effects on the soul. This fact is well known in the field of natural medicine. In the treatment of many mental illnesses, rays of different colors or water from bottles of different colors are used. Many such large hospitals have been built. The 'Solarium' in Jamnagar, Gujarat, is a well-known medical center of this kind in Asia.

Apart from Jainism, other Indian philosophies also have the concept of different colors in the context of the effects of internal states on the soul. For example, in Sankhya philosophy, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas are considered to be the three Gunas. There is also a discussion of the three colors of these three Gunas in many Sankhya texts. The author of the famous commentary on the Sankhya Karika, written by Ishwarkrishna, the Sankhya Tattva Kaumudi, has described the uncreated nature, which is not born from anything else, as a goat, comparing it to a goat, and has described it as red, white, and black. Red, white, and black are the colors of the three Gunas, Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas, accepted in Sankhya philosophy. Rajoguna makes the mind passionate or attached to desire, therefore it is red, Sattva guna makes the mind pure or free from impurities, therefore it is white, Tamoguna is in the form of darkness, it casts a veil over knowledge, therefore it is black. This context of Sankhya philosophy is comparable to Leshyas. 1. Ajamekan Lohi Tshuklakrishnam
Wahvi: Prajah Srijamanam Namamah. Aja Ye Tam Jushamanam Bhajante, Jahatyenaam Bhuktabhogam Numstaan. 

Page #121:
---------------------------
[80]
The *Upasakadasangasutra* states that Patanjali, in his *Yogasutra*, has described three types of karma: white, black, and mixed (white-black). These colors of karma are indicative of their merit and demerit.

The statement made above about the production of meritorious and demeritorious results in the soul through the substance-particles (dravya-leshya) needs to be understood in more depth. From a theoretical perspective, there are two causes for the results produced in the soul through the substance-particles, i.e., the emergence of emotion-particles (bhava-leshya): the rise of delusion-karma (moha-karma) or its subsidence, destruction, or subsidence of destruction. The emotion-particles that arise from the rise of delusion-karma are inauspicious or demeritorious, and those that arise from the subsidence, destruction, or subsidence of destruction of delusion-karma are auspicious or meritorious.

The black-particle (krishna-leshya), blue-particle (nila-leshya), and pigeon-colored particle (kapota-leshya) arise from the rise of delusion-karma, and are therefore demeritorious. The radiant-particle (tejo-leshya), lotus-particle (padma-leshya), and white-particle (shukla-leshya) arise from subsidence, destruction, or subsidence of destruction, and are therefore auspicious or meritorious.

On the one hand, there are emergent, subsiding, destructive, or subsiding of destruction emotions arising in the soul, and on the other hand, there are substance-particles or substance-particles arising. Therefore, it is not only the substance-particles that are the cause of the emotion-particles, nor are the emotion-particles the cause of the substance-particles alone. They are interdependent.

The statement made above about the emergence of emotion-particles or soul-results from substance-particles is from a gross perspective.

The interdependence of substance-particles and emotion-particles can be understood from an example in Ayurveda. In Ayurveda, there are three humors: bile (pitta), phlegm (kapha), and wind (vata). When bile is aggravated or has a special effect on the body, the person becomes angry and agitated. Anger and agitation further increase bile. When phlegm is strong, it produces lethargy, drowsiness, and laziness. Lethargy, drowsiness, and laziness further increase phlegm. The strength of wind produces restlessness, instability, and tremors. Restlessness and instability further increase wind. Thus, bile, etc., and the emotions of anger, etc., manifested by them are interdependent. The relationship between substance-particles and emotion-particles is somewhat similar.

Many texts in Jain literature have analyzed the particles (leshya) as appropriate. The 17th chapter of the *Prajnapana Sutra* and the 34th chapter of the *Uttaradhyayanasutra* contain detailed discussions of the particles, which are worth reading. This topic of Jain philosophy, along with modern psychology, is worthy of study from a critical and comparative perspective. Thus.

The indication in the present sutra of the increasingly meritorious or developing inner aspects of joy reveals that joy was highly aware in its role of inner refinement or inner purification. As a result, its particles, soul-results, became increasingly meritorious, and he attained omniscience. 1. Karma is of three kinds for yogis, white, black, and mixed, for others.
-Patanjali Yogasutra 4.7 

Page #122:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

[81] Ananda: Avadhi-Jnana

Infinite knowledge, infinite perception, infinite happiness, and infinite power of energy are the nature of the soul. Karma is the covering, according to Jain philosophy, they are pudgalatmak, concrete. They cover the nature of the soul. The nature of the soul is covered by them to the extent and in the way it is covered, it remains unmanifested. As the coverings of karma are removed - erased - by the soul's own firm determination, excellent results, pure emotions, and austerity, the nature of the soul is gradually revealed or manifested.

... The karmas that cover knowledge are called Jnanaavarana. In Jain philosophy, there are five types of knowledge: Mati-Jnana, Shruta-Jnana, Avadhi-Jnana, Manah-Paryaya-Jnana, and Kevala-Jnana.

The karma-pudgalas that cover or obscure them are called Mati-Jnanaavarana, Shruta-Jnanaavarana, Avadhi-Jnanaavarana, Manah-Paryaya-Jnanaavarana, and Kevala-Jnanaavarana respectively.

These five types of knowledge are revealed by the removal of these coverings. There are two divisions in them, indirect and direct. Direct knowledge is the direct perception of the object of knowledge by the soul without any other medium. Indirect knowledge does not have direct access to the object of knowledge. Mati-Jnana and Shruta-Jnana are indirect, because the cooperation of mind and senses is required there. In a gross way, we see an object with our eyes, we know it, it is called direct seeing. But it is only a colloquial language, therefore, in philosophy, it is called Saavyavaharik Pratyaksha. From the point of view of certainty, it does not come under Pratyaksha because there is a relationship, not direct, between the knower soul and the object of knowledge through the eyes.

Avadhi-Jnana, Manah-Paryaya-Jnana, and Kevala-Jnana do not require the help of senses and mind. There is direct access of knowledge to the object of knowledge. Therefore, they come under Pratyaksha-bhed. Among them, Kevala-Jnana is called Sakal Paramार्थिक Pratyaksha and Avadhi and Manah-Paryaya are called Vikal or incomplete Paramार्थिक Pratyaksha, they cannot know the complete Paryaya of the object of knowledge.

Avadhi-Jnana is that extra-sensory knowledge by which a person knows concrete or similar objects with a limit or boundary of substance, field, time, and emotion. The extent of Avadhi-Jnana is according to the intensity of the destruction of Avadhi-Jnanaavarana karma.

There is one more special thing about Avadhi-Jnana, it is innate in the Deva-Yoni and Naraka-Yoni. It is called Bhav-Pratyay Avadhi-Jnana. In these Yonis, as soon as the beings take birth, Avadhi-Jnana arises spontaneously through the appropriate destruction of Avadhi-Jnanaavarana. This means that they do not have to make efforts based on austerity for the destruction of Avadhi-Jnanaavarana. It is not even possible there.

By means of austerity, vows, renunciation, etc., nirjaramulak rituals, the Avadhi-Jnanaavarana-karma-pudgalas... 

Page #123:
---------------------------
## 82]

The **avadhi-jnana** (clairvoyance) obtained through the **kshayopashama** (cessation of karmic obscurations) of the **Upasaka Dasanga Sutra** is called **guna-pratyaya avadhi-jnana**. It occurs in both humans and animals. 

A key difference between **bhaava-pratyaya avadhi-jnana** (clairvoyance based on the nature of the being) and **guna-pratyaya avadhi-jnana** is that **bhaava-pratyaya avadhi-jnana** is experienced by every being in the **deva-yoni** (heavenly realm) and **naraka-yoni** (hellish realm), while **guna-pratyaya avadhi-jnana** is not experienced by all humans and animals due to the **pratyaya** (karmic influence). It is only attained by those who have developed the necessary **yogyatha** (merit) and whose **avadhi-jnana-avaran** (karmic obscurations of clairvoyance) have been **kshayopashama** (completely ceased).

**Ananda**, through his exceptional **atma-bal** (spiritual strength), pure **bhaava** (attitude), and dedicated **prayatna** (effort), had attained a state where his **avadhi-jnana-avaran-karma-pudgala** (karmic particles obscuring clairvoyance) had been **kshayopashama** (completely ceased), resulting in the manifestation of **avadhi-jnana**.

This sutra discusses the extent of **avadhi-jnana** attained by the **Shramanopasaka Ananda**, mentioning the **lavanasamuudra** (salt ocean) in the east, west, and south, and the **Chullhimanvant** (smaller Himalayas) in the north. These are related to the **madhyaloka** (middle world). According to Jain geography, the human realm of the **madhyaloka** extends to two and a half **dvipas** (islands). The **Jambudvipa** is in the center, a circular island with a diameter of one lakh **yojanas** (a unit of distance). It is one lakh **yojanas** long and one lakh **yojanas** wide. Within **Jambudvipa** are seven regions: **Bharatavarsha**, **Haimvata Varsha**, **Hari Varsha**, **Videha Varsha**, **Ramya Varsha**, **Hairanya Varsha**, and **Airavata Varsha**. These seven regions are separated by six mountain ranges: **Himavan**, **Mahahimavan**, **Nishada**, **Neela**, **Rukmi**, and **Shikhari**. The **lavanasamuudra** surrounds **Jambudvipa**, with a diameter twice that of **Jambudvipa**. The **Dhataki Khanda** island surrounds the **lavanasamuudra**, with a diameter twice that of the **lavanasamuudra**. The **Kalodadhi** ocean surrounds the **Dhataki Khanda**, with an extent twice that of the **Dhataki Khanda**. The **Pushkara Dvipa** surrounds the **Kalodadhi** ocean. In the center of this island is the **Manushottara Parvata** (mountain). This is the limit of human habitation, meaning humans reside in **Jambudvipa**, **Dhataki Khanda**, and half of **Pushkara Dvipa** - a total of two and a half **dvipas**.

The **avadhi-jnana** experienced by **Shramanopasaka Ananda** enabled him to see five hundred **yojanas** in all three directions - east, west, and south - across the **lavanasamuudra** surrounding **Jambudvipa**. He could also see as far as the **Himavan** mountain range in the north.

Within **Jambudvipa**, the first two mountain ranges are the **Himavan** and **Mahahimavan**. This sutra uses the term **Chullhimanvant** for **Himavan**, where **Chull** means "smaller". This epithet is used in comparison to the **Mahahimavan**.

The sutra hints at **Ananda**'s ability to see up to the **Saudharma Kalpa** in the **Urdhvaloka** (upper world). The following **devalokas** (heavenly realms) are located in the **Urdhvaloka**: **Saudharma**, **Aishana**, **Sanatkumara**, **Mahendra**, **Brahmaloka**, **Lantaka**, **Mahashukra**, **Sahasrar**, **Anata**, **Pranata**, **Aran**, **Achyuta**, nine **Graiveyaka** realms, and five **Anuttara Vimana** realms: **Vijay**, **Vaijayanta**, **Jayanta**, **Aparajita**, and **Sarvarthasiddha**. **Saudharma** is the first of these **devalokas**.

The following seven **naraka bhumis** (hellish realms) are located in the **Adholoka** (lower world): **Ratnaprabha**, **Sharkaraprabha**, **Balukaprabha**, **Panka prabha**, 

Page #124:
---------------------------
## First Study: Gathapati Ananda

[83 Dhuma Prabha, Tama Prabha and Maha Tama Prabha. These are situated one below the other. Ratna Prabha is an upper division of the first hell, Lolupacyuta, in the earth, where the narakas with a state of eighty-four thousand years reside.]

The third chapter of the Tattvartha Sutra describes the Adholka and Madhyaloka, and the fourth chapter describes the Urddhvaloka. The Jambudvipa Prajnapti has a detailed discussion on this subject.

The extent of the Avadhijnana of the Shramanopasaka Ananda was up to the above-mentioned limit in all four directions due to the destruction and cessation of his Avadhi-Jnana-Avarana-Karma-Pudgalas.

75. Tenam Kalena Tenam Samayena Samane Bhagavan Mahavir Samosarie, Parisa Niggaya Jav Padigaya.

At that time, at the end of the fourth Ara of the present Avasarpini, Bhagavan Mahavir arrived. The assembly gathered, listened to the Dharma and returned.

76. Tenam Kalena Tenam Samayena Samanas Bhagavo Mahavirassa Jeththe Antevassi Indabhui Namam Anagare Goyam-Gottena, Sattusse He, Samachauram Sansthanasanthie, Vajrisahanarayasanghayane, Kanagapulganighasapamhgore, Uggatave, Ditatave, Tattatave, Ghoratave, Mahatave, Urale, Ghoragune, Ghoratavassi Ghor-Bhambacheravasi, Ucchudhasariere, Sankhitta-Viulatteu-Lesse, Chathe-Chathena Anikkhitteena Tavo-Kammena Sanjamena Tavasa Appaana Bhavamane Viharai.

At that time, at that time, the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir's elder Antevassi, an Anagara named Indrabhuiti, belonging to the Gautama Gotra, whose height was seven hands, who was Samachaturasra-Sansthan-Sansthit, with the four limbs of the body being harmonious, the limbs being proportional to each other, balanced and coordinated, the holder of a body with a harmonious structure, who was Vajra-Rishabha-Naracha-Sanhanan-Sudrdha Asthi-Bandha-Yukta, with a special body structure, who was like a lotus with the brilliance of a gold line engraved on a touchstone, who was fair in complexion, who was a fierce ascetic, who was like fire in burning the ashes of intense ascetic deeds, who was a fervent ascetic whose body was filled with the intense glow of asceticism, who was a harsh and abundant ascetic, who was strong in Urala, a powerful practice, who was the holder of Ghoraguna, the highest virtues, which require extraordinary strength to possess, who was a fierce ascetic, a powerful ascetic, a fierce Brahmachari, a strict follower of celibacy, who was devoid of bodily adornment or decoration, who had a vast Tejo-Leshya contained within his body, who was constantly performing various austerities, who was cultivating his soul through the practice of restraint and other austerities rooted in it, was dwelling.

1. See Sutra number 11. 

Page #125:
---------------------------
## The Upasakadasanga Sutra (Chapter 77-79)

**77.**  The Venerable Gotama, having received permission from the Venerable Mahavira, performed self-study in the first watch of the day of the Paryushana festival, practiced meditation in the second watch, and with unwavering focus, free from anxiety and confusion, meticulously transcribed the Mukhavastraka in the third watch. He then transcribed and cleaned the bowls and robes, picked them up, and proceeded to where the Venerable Mahavira was. He bowed and prostrated before him, and then said, "Venerable Sir, with your permission, I wish to go on a begging round today, the day of the Paryushana festival, in the city of Vanijyagrama, visiting homes of all classes, high, low, and middle, without skipping any." The Venerable Mahavira replied, "Devapriya, do as you please (without any restrictions or delays)."

**78.**  Having received permission from the Venerable Mahavira, the Venerable Gotama departed from the Duitipalasa Caitya. He walked with unwavering focus, free from anxiety and confusion, carefully observing the path for three and a half hand-spans ahead, and with mindful steps, reached the city of Vanijyagrama. He then began his begging round, visiting homes of all classes, high, low, and middle.

**79.**  The Venerable Gotama, in the city of Vanijyagrama, as per the rules, continued his begging round, visiting homes of all classes, high, low, and middle, until he had received enough food and drink. He then left the city of Vanijyagrama. As he was walking away, not far from the city, he heard the sound of many people, and saw a large crowd... 

Page #126:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Ananda

[85] Thus it is said, O Devānupriya! The monk Ānanda, the disciple of the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, was engaged in the last stages of his life (marana-sanlehana-jhushana-jhushiye, bhattapaanapariyaaikkhie kaalam) in the posah-sala (monastery). 

Bhagavān Gautama, following the rules of bhikṣācaryā (begging for food) as described in the Vyākhyāprajñapti Sutra (in high, low, and middle families), had taken as much food and water as he needed. After taking food, he left the commercial town and city. While passing by the Kollaraka sannivesa (settlement), not too far or too close, he heard many people talking. They were saying to each other, "O Devānupriya! The monk Ānanda, the disciple of the Bhagavān Mahāvīra, is engaged in the last stages of his life (marana-sanlehana-jhushana-jhushiye, bhattapaanapariyaaikkhie kaalam) in the posah-sala (monastery), without desiring death."

[80] Hearing this from many people, Gautama's mind was filled with such a feeling, thought, or intention: "I will go to the monk Ānanda and see him." Thinking this, he went to the Kollaraka sannivesa, the posah-sala, and the monk Ānanda.

[81] Seeing Bhagavān Gautama coming, the monk Ānanda was overwhelmed with joy. He bowed and prostrated himself before Bhagavān Gautama, and said, "O Bhagavān! I am so weakened by severe austerities that my veins are visible on my body. Therefore, I am unable to come to you, O Devānupriya, and bow down to your feet three times. Therefore, O Master! Please come here of your own free will, without any compulsion, so that I can bow down to your feet three times and pay my respects to you, O Devānupriya."

[82] Then Bhagavān Gautama went to the monk Ānanda. 

Page #127:
---------------------------
## 86]
[Upasakadasangasutra]

Then the Bhagavan Gautama went to where the Shramanopasaka Anand was.

83. Then that Anand, the Shramanopasaka, with his head bowed three times, paid homage and prostrated himself at the feet of the Bhagavan Gautama. After paying homage and prostrating himself, he said, "Bhagavan! Does the knowledge of Avadhi arise in a householder who is living in a household?"

-
"Yes, it does."

"Bhagavan! If the knowledge of Avadhi arises in a householder, then Bhagavan! I, too, have attained the knowledge of Avadhi while living in a household. I know and see the salt sea, five hundred yojanas in each direction, east, west, and south, and the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara mountain in the north, the Saudharma Kalpa in the upper direction, and the Lolupacyuta Naraka in the lower direction, which is the first Naraka-9-bhoomi Rattra-Prabha."

The Shramanopasaka Anand bowed his head three times and paid homage and prostrated himself at the feet of the Bhagavan Gautama. After paying homage and prostrating himself, he said, "Bhagavan! Does the knowledge of Avadhi arise in a householder?"

-
"Yes, it does."

"Bhagavan! If the knowledge of Avadhi arises in a householder, then Bhagavan! I, too, have attained the knowledge of Avadhi while living in a household. I know and see the salt sea, five hundred yojanas in each direction, east, west, and south, and the Chulla Himavan Varshadhara mountain in the north, the Saudharma Kalpa in the upper direction, and the Lolupacyuta Naraka in the lower direction, which is the first Naraka-9-bhoomi Rattra-Prabha."

84. Then the Bhagavan Gautama said to the Shramanopasaka Anand, "Anand! The knowledge of Avadhi can arise in a householder, but not to such a vast extent. Therefore, Anand! You should criticize, condemn, and censure this situation or tendency of this place, (perform Pratikramana - return to a pure inner state, condemn this tendency, censure it, feel inner regret, shatter it - break it or erase it, purify this non-action or inaction, cleanse the faults arising from it, become ready for appropriate atonement) and accept the Tapas-Karma for that purpose."

85. Then that Anand, the Shramanopasaka, said to the Bhagavan Gautama, "Bhagavan! In the words of the Jina, the truth, the right conduct, the right knowledge, and the right faith, should be criticized, condemned, and censured, shattered, purified, cleansed of non-action, and become ready for atonement. See Sutra number 83."

1. 

Page #128:
---------------------------
[87
First Study: Gathapati Ananda]  Tavo-karma) is it to be criticized?
No, it is not.
"O Venerable One! In the Jina's teachings, for true, authentic, factual, and virtuous feelings, criticism (pratikramana, ninda, garha, nivrtti, akaranata-visuddhi, yathocita prayaschitta, tadanuroopa tapa-kriya) is not to be accepted."
Ananda said, "O Venerable One! If in the Jina's teachings, criticism (pratikramana, ninda, garha, nivrtti, akaranata-visuddhi, yathocita prayaschitta, tadanuroopa tapa-kriya) is not to be accepted for true feelings, then, Venerable One! You yourself should accept criticism (pratikramana, ninda, garha, nivrtti, akaranata-visuddhi, yathocita prayaschitta, tadanuroopa tapa-kriya) for this place-conduct."
86. When the Venerable Ananda said this, the Venerable Gautama, filled with doubt, curiosity, and uncertainty, left Ananda's presence. Having left, he went to the Venerable Mahavira, the great sage. Having gone, he stood near the Venerable Mahavira, the great sage, and performed pratikramana. Having performed pratikramana, he criticized the place-conduct. Having criticized, he saw the food and drink. Having seen, he bowed and prostrated to the Venerable Mahavira. Having bowed and prostrated, he said, "Venerable One! I have told you everything, just as I was filled with doubt, curiosity, and uncertainty, and left Ananda's presence. Having left, I came here. Venerable One! Should Ananda's place-conduct be criticized (pratikramana, ninda, garha, nivrtti, visodha, akaranata, abbhutta, aharita, payaschitta, tavo-karma) or not? Should I criticize it?"
The Venerable Mahavira, the great sage, said, "O Gautama! You yourself should criticize that place-conduct. And Ananda, the Shramanopasaka, is just like this." 

Page #129:
---------------------------
## 88]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
Doubt arose. They departed from Ananda. Departing, they came to where the Duutipalasha Chaitya was, where Lord Mahavira was. Arriving, they performed Pratikraman (atonement) of going and coming not too far, not too close to the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, and criticized the Eshaniya-Aneshaniya (things that should be done and things that should not be done). After criticizing, they showed the food and water to the Bhagwan. Showing it, they bowed and prostrated, and told everything that had happened after they had gone for alms with the Bhagwan's permission! Doing so, they said, "After this incident, I have come to you immediately from Shramanopasak Ananda, being doubtful, desirous, and uncertain. Bhagwan! Should Shramanopasak Ananda accept the criticism (Pratikraman, Ninda, Garha, Nivritti, Akaranata-Vishuddhi, Yathochit Prayashchitta, and the corresponding Tapa-kriya) for this place-conduct, or should I?"
Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said, "Gautam! You should perform the criticism for this place-conduct, and also seek forgiveness from Shramanopasak Ananda for it."

## 87.
Therefore, Bhagwan Gautam, hearing the words of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, "You are right," said so with humility. Hearing it, he accepted the criticism (Pratikraman, Ninda, Garha, Nivritti, Akaranata-Vishuddhi, Yathochit Prayashchitta, and the corresponding Tapa-kriya) for that place-conduct, and sought forgiveness from Shramanopasak Ananda.

## 88.
Then, Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, after that, went to other Janapadas (regions) for Vihar (wandering).

## 89.
Then, Shramanopasak Ananda, by many kinds of Sila-vratas (virtuous vows) [Gunavrata, Viraman Virati, Pratyakhyan Tyag, and Poshadhopavas], cultivated his own self, having attained the Shramanopasak-Paryaya (stage of a lay follower) for twenty years, having properly fasted eleven Upasak-Pratima (images of lay followers), having purified himself by the Sanlehana (purification) of the month, having cut off himself from food and drink for the sake of the Bhatta (meal), being critical and performing Pratikraman, being Samahit (collected), having spent time in the Kalmasa (month) and Kal (time), having attained the Soham (self-realization) in the Soham-Vadimsa (twenty-second) Maha-Vimana (great celestial palace) in the Arun (red) Vimana (celestial palace) in the Uttar-Purthima (north-east) direction, he attained the state of a Devata (divine being). There, four Pali-ovamas (similes) were established for the Devas (divine beings) who had attained the state of Arhat (liberated). There, four Pali-ovamas were also established for Ananda, who had become a Deva. 

Page #130:
---------------------------
## First Study: The Story of Ananda

[89] Following the path, completing a month of fasting and sixty meals, and after undergoing criticism and repentance, Ananda, upon the arrival of death, relinquished his body in a state of meditation. After leaving his body, he was reborn as a god in the Arun-Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the Saudharma-Avatamsaka Maha-Vimana in the Saudharma Devaloka. There, the lifespan of many gods is four Palya-Upama. The lifespan of Shramanopasaka Ananda is also said to be four Palya-Upama.

[90] "O Ananda, Venerable One! When the lifespan, existence, and state of the gods in that Devaloka come to an end, where will they go after relinquishing their divine bodies? Where will they be reborn?"

"O Gotama! They will attain Siddha-Gati or liberation in the Maha-Videha realm."

||Nikkhevo|| ||The first study of the seventh Anga, Upasaka-Dasha, is complete.||

Gotama asked the Bhagavan Mahavir, "Venerable One! Where will Ananda go after relinquishing his divine body when his lifespan, existence, and state in that Devaloka come to an end? Where will he be reborn?"

The Bhagavan said, "O Gotama! Ananda will attain Siddha-Gati or liberation in the Maha-Videha realm."

||Nikkhevo|| ||The first study of the seventh Anga, Upasaka-Dasha, is complete.||

1. "Thus, O Jambu! This is the meaning of the first study of Upasaka-Dasha as explained by the Shraman."
2. "The conclusion," said the Arya Sudharma, "O Jambu! This is the meaning of the first study of Upasaka-Dasha as explained by the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavir, which I have told you." 

Page #131:
---------------------------
## Second Study Summary

The story takes place during the time of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, in the city of Champa, located in what is now known as Bihar. The king of Champa was Jitashatru. The city of Champa was likely located near present-day Bhagalpur, where some remnants and signs still exist today.

Champa was a very prosperous city in its time. A Gahapati named Kamdev lived there. His wife was named Bhadra, who was virtuous and devoted to her husband. Kamdev was a very wealthy and prosperous householder. His wealth surpassed even that of Anand. He had six crore gold coins in his treasury as permanent capital, six crore gold coins invested in trade and business, and six crore gold coins used for the consumption of luxurious items, decorations, and other household necessities. He owned six Gokuls, each with ten thousand cows. With such immense wealth, he must have had a large number of servants, maids, and employees. Kamdev possessed all that is considered happiness, prosperity, and wealth in worldly terms.

Kamdev's family life was happy. He was a courteous and sociable person. He was a leader in society. He was highly respected in the royal court. The city's prominent and respected citizens sought his advice on important matters and respected his words. This was because Kamdev was wise.

Like Anand, a new turn came in Kamdev's life. He had a special opportunity to awaken his wisdom. Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, preaching the message of non-violence, equality, and good conduct to the people, arrived in Champa with his followers. He stayed at the Chaitya called Purnabhadra. Upon hearing of the Bhagwan's arrival, a throng of devotees gathered to see him. King Jitashatru also went to see the Bhagwan with his royal pomp and show. Other devout citizens also arrived there. As soon as Kamdev learned of this, he went to the Bhagwan's service with a desire to listen to the Dharma. He listened to the Dharma-Deshana. His wisdom was awakened. The Bhagwan's teachings shook the mind of this supremely wealthy Gahapati. Like Anand, he accepted the Griha-Dharma from the Bhagwan. Even while remaining a householder, he tried to avoid indulgence, desires, cravings, and lust as much as possible, keeping his life disciplined and controlled. The feeling of attachment was diminishing in his life.

Like Anand, another turning point came in his life. He left his family and worldly life... 

Page #132:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[91] Kamadeva entrusted his eldest son with his responsibilities and dedicated himself fully to his spiritual practices. He immersed himself in the worship of virtue, vows, renunciation, and non-attachment. While doing so, a time of testing came in his life. He was seated in the dining hall, taking his meal. To disrupt his practice, a deceitful deity arrived. He assumed the form of a terrifying, monstrous, and fearsome demon to frighten and distress Kamadeva. The sight of this demon made one's mind tremble.

The demon, holding a sharp sword in his hand, threatened and intimidated Kamadeva, saying, "Abandon your worship, or I will cut you into pieces with this sword right now." Kamadeva was a wise and courageous man, steadfast in his faith. The hour of testing is the crucible where a person is proven true or false. Kamadeva was being tested. When Kamadeva remained unwavering, the demon became even more enraged. He repeated his threat a second and third time, but Kamadeva remained firm and steady as before. Then, the demon did as he had said and tore Kamadeva's body into pieces. Kamadeva endured this excruciating pain with self-strength and patience, without flinching. This was a divine illusion, and it happened so quickly that Kamadeva was immediately restored to his physical form.

The deity, intending to further distract Kamadeva from his practice, decided to inflict more suffering. He took the form of a frenzied, untamed elephant. He threatened to toss Kamadeva into the air, pierce him with his tusks, and trample him underfoot. He did this once, twice, and three times. Kamadeva remained steadfast and firm. Then, the elephant-shaped deity inflicted the pain he had threatened, but Kamadeva's steadfastness remained unshaken.

The deity tried again. He became a fierce, venomous serpent. In the form of a serpent, he cruelly tormented Kamadeva, wrapping himself three times around his neck and striking him with his fangs on his chest. But this attempt also failed. Kamadeva did not waver in the slightest. He passed the test of the crucible. One who does not waver even in the presence of the causes of attachment is truly patient. Non-violence triumphed over violence. The violent deity was defeated by the non-violent Kamadeva. The deity exclaimed, "Kamadeva! You are truly blessed!" He fell at Kamadeva's feet and begged for forgiveness. He explained that he had heard Indra praising Kamadeva's religious steadfastness in the Saudharma heaven, and he could not bear it. That is why he had come to inflict these hardships.

The devotee Kamadeva's mind was absorbed in his worship. When he realized that the hardship had ended, he completed the parana of the accepted image.

By a fortunate coincidence, Lord Mahavira arrived in the city of Champa during his travels through the countryside. When Kamadeva heard this, he thought, "How wonderful it would be if I could pay my respects to the Lord and complete my fast." Accordingly, he went to the Purnabhadra shrine where the Lord was seated. He saw the Lord and was overjoyed. The Lord was omniscient. He knew everything that had happened. He said to Kamadeva, 

Page #133:
---------------------------
[92]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
The three afflictions that Kamadeva had endured fearlessly were mentioned, addressing him. The Lord said to Kamadeva, "Kamadeva! Did all this happen?" Kamadeva replied humbly, "Bhanta! It happened."
Keeping in mind this incident with Kamadeva, the Lord Mahavira addressed the assembled monks and nuns, saying, "If a Shramanopasaka can maintain such steadfastness in Dharma even while living as a householder, then it is your duty to do so. A seeker should never be afraid of hardships, but should endure them with fortitude. This makes the practice pure and radiant."
In the Lord's view, Kamadeva's conduct was an inspiring example in terms of religious steadfastness, so he considered it useful to discuss it publicly.
Kamadeva asked the Lord many questions out of curiosity, received solutions, and returned after paying homage and salutations. The Poshadh was concluded.
Kamadeva increasingly immersed himself in practice. His results became brighter and brighter, his mind became absorbed in spirituality. A brief description of his devotional life is as follows:
Kamadeva practiced Shramanopasaka-Dharma for twenty years, worshipped eleven images, performed the final Sanlekhana for one month, and relinquished his body through fasting and meditation. He became a god in the Arunaabha Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the Sodharmavatansaka Maha Vimana in the Saudharma Kalpa, with a lifespan of four Palyopama. 

Page #134:
---------------------------
## Second Study

**Kamdeva 91.**  "If, Venerable Sir, the Blessed Lord Mahavira has explained the meaning of the first study of the Upasakadasa, the seventh Anga, with the attainment of all the virtues, then, Venerable Sir, what is the meaning of the second study?"

**Arya Sudharma** asked Jambu.

**Kamdeva 92.** "Thus, Jambu, at that time, in that era, there was a city called Champa. There was a Caitya called Punnabhadda. The king's name was Jitasatru. There was a Gahapati named Kamdeva. His wife's name was Bhadra. Gahapati Kamdeva had six crore gold coins in his treasury, six crore gold coins in trade, and six crore gold coins in his household wealth and resources. He had six Gokulas. Each Gokula had ten thousand cows. 

He lived a life of enjoyment and then renounced the world. He followed the path of right conduct. 

He would tell his eldest son, "Do not ask me for anything. When the Posha-sala is ready, then come to me." When he came, he would enjoy the Posha-sala. After enjoying it, he would take possession of the Uccarapasa-vana land. After taking possession of it, he would build a Dabbha-santhara. After building it, he would make the Dabbha-santhara inaccessible. After making it inaccessible, he would live in the Posha-sala, having enjoyed the Dabbha-santhara. 

He lived, having attained the ultimate Dharma-pannatti of the Blessed Lord Mahavira." 

Page #135:
---------------------------
[94]
[Upasakadasanga Sutra: Bhagwan Mahavira arrives. Samavasaran takes place. Just like Gathapati Anand, Gathapati Kamadeva also left his home and reached Bhagwan, accepting the Shravak-Dharma.
_ The further event is also the same as Anand's. After taking permission from his elder son, friends and caste people, Kamadeva came to the place where the Poshad-Shala was, (and like Anand, he cleaned the Poshad-Shala, marked the place for defecation and urination, laid a bed of Kusha grass, and sat on it. After doing so, he accepted the Poshad in the Poshad-Shala,) and became engrossed in worship, following the Dharma-Pragyapti and Dharma-Shiksha taught by Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.  
**Attack by a Dev in the form of a Pisach**
93.  Then, during the time of the night, a deceitful Dev, with a false view, appeared before Shraman Upasak Kamadeva.
_ (After that, at some time) in the middle of the night, a deceitful Dev, with a false view, appeared before Shraman Upasak Kamadeva.
**Discussion**
In Indian literature, there are many descriptions of obstacles that arise in the context of excellent penance, practice, and religious observance, which are both fear-inducing and delusion-inducing. While there are mentions of cruel and brutal acts of demons and Pisachs to instill fear in the mind of the seeker, there are also characters who are driven by lust and desire, who try to attract and delude the seeker towards pleasure and enjoyment.
In Vedic literature, there are descriptions in many Puranas and other literature of demons disturbing and corrupting the penance and Yajna rituals of the Rishis. On the other hand, there are also accounts of beautiful celestial beings trying to seduce them and distract them from their religious practices.
In Buddhist literature, too, there are descriptions of this kind in many incidents like the 'Mar-Vijay' of Bhagwan Buddha.
Jain literature also has its own tradition of such descriptions. There are vivid and exciting descriptions in many Agam-Granths and other literature of attacks and disturbances caused by Devas, Pisachs, etc., to disrupt and destroy excellent and commendable religious practices, where all three emotions - Raudra, Bhayankar, and Vibhats - appear embodied.
The present description is a vivid example of this.
94. Then, that Dev transformed into a huge Pisach-like form. That Dev, in the form of a Pisach, had these characteristics: his body was adorned with these colors and clothes, his head was like a cow's head, and he was covered in hair. 

Page #136:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[95]

The demon, a monstrous being, was described as follows:

His head resembled a basket used for feeding cattle, made of bamboo. His hair was coarse and thick, like the fibers of rice stalks, brown in color, and shiny. His forehead was large and prominent, like the lid of a large earthen pot. His eyebrows were scattered like a squirrel's tail, appearing distorted, ugly, and repulsive. His eyes, resembling "earthen pots," protruded from his head, appearing distorted and repulsive. His ears were large and ugly, like broken soup bowls. His nose was flat, like a frog's nose. His nostrils, resembling pits, were like two connected ovens. His mustache, like a horse's tail, was brown, distorted, and repulsive. His lips were long, like a camel's lips. His teeth were like the iron of a plow. His tongue was like a piece of soup, appearing distorted and repulsive. His chin protruded like the tip of a plow. His cheeks, sunken like the inside of a frying pan, appeared pitted, cracked, brown, hard, and terrifying. His shoulders were like a mridanga (a type of drum). His chest was wide, like the gate of a city. His arms were like the earthen ovens used for smelting iron and other metals. His palms were like the stones used for grinding lentils. His fingers were like the handles of a grinding stone. His nails were like seashells, sharp and thick. His breasts, resembling a leather bag used by barbers for holding razors and other tools, hung from his chest. His belly was round, like an iron chest. His navel was not like the navel of a human being. His eyes were shaped like a sikka (a type of coin). His cheeks were like the pits of a fruit. His thighs were like the earthen ovens used for cooking. His knees were bent and twisted, appearing distorted and repulsive. His shins and calves were covered with hair. His feet were like the soles of a shoe. His toes were like the handles of a grinding stone. His nails were like seashells. 

Page #137:
---------------------------
[96]
The demon's knees were deep like the earthenware pot used by potters to polish their wares. His eye-jewel hung like a sneeze. His testicles were like two loose sacks or bags. His thighs were like two identical chambers. His knees were crooked, deformed, and hideous, like the thick, knotted stems of a particular type of grass or tree. His shins were hard and covered in hair. His feet were like stones used for grinding lentils. His toes were like the roots of a tree. His nails were like shells.

[95]
He was adorned with a garland of lizards, a garland of broken, twisted, and crooked bones, a tongue that was split and hanging out, a garland of chameleons, a garland of rats that was his mark, a garland of mongooses in place of earrings, and snakes wrapped around his body like a shawl. He was pounding his arms, roaring, and laughing terribly. His body was covered in hair of all five colors.

This demon, holding a sharp sword that was as blue as a blue lotus, as dark as a buffalo horn, and as bright as a flax flower, went to the place where the food storehouse was and where the ascetic, the devotee, Kamadeva, was. Arriving there, he was extremely angry... 

Page #138:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[97]
The enraged, furious, and terrifying demon, with a fierce breath and a menacing growl, spoke to the ascetic Kamadeva, "You who desire death, the unwanted, the unwelcomed! You who were born on an inauspicious day, a day of sorrow and ill omens, when the auspicious fourteenth day was incomplete and the new moon arrived in the hours! You who are devoid of shame, beauty, patience, and fame! You who yearn, desire, and thirst for dharma, merit, heaven, and liberation! You who are beloved of the gods! It is not fitting for you to be distracted, disturbed, broken, shattered, abandoned, or to renounce your vows, your restraints, your abstentions, your rejections, and your fasts. You are bound by your promise to uphold them. But if you do not abandon, break, or renounce your vows, your restraints, your abstentions, and your fasts today, then I will cut you to pieces with this sword, which is as blue as a blue lotus, a buffalo horn, and a flax flower, and as sharp as a razor. Then, O beloved of the gods, you will be consumed by anguish and unbearable pain, and you will be prematurely separated from life, your life force will be extinguished."

[96] Even when the demon spoke thus, the ascetic Kamadeva remained fearless, undisturbed, unperturbed, unshaken, unmoved, and tranquil. He remained steadfast in his meditation on dharma.

[97] The demon, in the form of a demon, saw the ascetic Kamadeva fearless, undisturbed, unperturbed, unshaken, unmoved, and tranquil, remaining steadfast in his meditation on dharma. Seeing this, he spoke again, "O Kamadeva, ascetic! You who desire the undesired! If you do not abandon, break, or renounce your vows, your restraints, your abstentions, and your fasts today, then I will cut you to pieces with this sword, which is as blue as a blue lotus, a buffalo horn, and a flax flower, and as sharp as a razor. Then, O beloved of the gods, you will be consumed by anguish and unbearable pain, and you will be prematurely separated from life, your life force will be extinguished."

[98] Even when the demon spoke thus again and again, the ascetic Kamadeva remained fearless, undisturbed, unperturbed, unshaken, unmoved, and tranquil. 

Page #139:
---------------------------
[98]
The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra, Dhamma-Jhana, is being practiced.
The Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, even when told by the deva for the second time, the third time, remained unperturbed, undisturbed, unshaken, unwavering, unagitated, and peaceful, remaining engaged in his Dharma meditation.
[99]
Then, that deva, assuming the form of a Pisaca, saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, still engaged in his meditation without fear. Seeing this, he became extremely angry, his forehead furrowed with three lines of anger, he drew his sword and struck Kamadeva, cutting him into pieces.
[100]
Then, the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva endured that intense (immense, excessive, harsh, deep, fierce, painful) and unbearable pain with patience (forgiveness and forbearance).
The Obstacle in the Form of an Elephant
[101]
Then, that deva, assuming the form of a Pisaca, saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, still engaged in his meditation without fear. Seeing this, he could not make the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva deviate from the Nirgrantha-Pravachana-Jina-Dharma, nor could he make him agitated, nor could he change his mind. He was unable to change his mind, so he became exhausted, 1. See Sutra number 97. 2. See Sutra number 95. 3. See Sutra number 95. 

Page #140:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[99]
He retreated slowly, weary and dejected.  He left the food-hall and, upon leaving, abandoned the form of the demon created by divine illusion.  Having done so, he assumed the form of a gigantic elephant born of divine illusion.  The elephant was well-built, with seven limbs (four legs, trunk, genitals, and tail).  His body was beautiful and well-proportioned.  He was upright and high in the front, and bent like a pig in the back.  His belly was tight like a goat's.  His lower lip and trunk were long.  The teeth protruding from his mouth were white and bright like the half-opened bud of a betel nut.  They were encased in gold, meaning they were covered with a golden sheath.  The front part of his trunk was beautifully curved like a drawn bow.  His feet were complete, well-nourished, and flat like a tortoise's.  He had twenty nails.  His tail was beautiful, close to his body, and of appropriate length and shape.  The elephant was intoxicated with madness.  He roared like a cloud.  His speed was capable of conquering the speed of mind and wind.

[102]
When the demon, having assumed the form of an elephant, reached the food-hall where the ascetic Kamadeva was, he spoke to him in the same way as the demon before: "O Kamadeva! O ascetic! If you do not abandon your vows (of conduct, vows, restraint, renunciation, and fasting), if you do not break them, then today I will seize you with my trunk.  I will take you out of the food-hall.  I will lift you up into the sky.  I will throw you down and crush you with my sharp, club-like teeth.  I will trample you three times with my feet on the earth, so that you will be tormented by great pain and anguish, and you will be separated from life prematurely, you will die."

[103]
When the ascetic Kamadeva heard these words spoken by the demon in the form of an elephant, he remained fearless and continued his meditation.

1. See Sutra number 98. 

Page #141:
---------------------------
[100]
The Deva in the form of an elephant saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva fearless and engaged in his worship. Seeing him, he said to the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, "Oh Kamadeva! You are doing well!" and continued to watch him.
[105] The Deva in the form of an elephant saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva fearless and engaged in his worship. Seeing him, he became furious and grabbed the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva with his trunk. He lifted him up into the sky and then threw him down, crushing him with his sharp, club-like teeth. He then trampled him three times with his feet on the ground.
[106] The Shramanopasaka Kamadeva endured the intense, vast, harsh, deep, fierce, and painful suffering (like a serpent's venom).
[107] The Deva in the form of an elephant saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva, who was not shaken (even when he was moved, disturbed, or transformed by the Nigganthas, the Pavayanas, or the Tantras). He then cursed the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva and left the feeding hall. He then abandoned his divine elephant form and transformed into a great, fierce, terrible, and monstrous serpent. The serpent was black, with a body like a mouse, and had eyes full of anger and venom. It had a black, smoky, and bright glow, red bloodshot eyes, a forked, flickering, and restless tongue, and a body like a mountain. It had sharp, crooked, twisted, and hard fangs, and its roar was like the sound of thunder. The serpent was full of fierce and terrible anger. 

Page #142:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

**[101]** When the god in the form of an elephant approached the ascetic Kamadeva, he spoke to him. Having spoken, the god in the form of an elephant said to the ascetic Kamadeva, "O Kamadeva! Ascetic! As long as you do not abandon (your conduct, your vows, your renunciation, your rejection, your fasting), as long as you do not break them, I will immediately rush upon your body. Having rushed upon your body, I will wrap myself around your neck from behind with my sharp tail. Having wrapped myself around your neck, I will pierce your chest with my sharp, poisonous fangs. Just as you have been tormenting and harassing living beings untimely, you will be tormented and harassed untimely."

When the god in the form of an elephant could not deter, disturb, or change the ascetic Kamadeva from his meditation, he retreated slowly, exhausted, weary, and dejected. He retreated and went out of the fasting hall. Having gone out of the fasting hall, he abandoned his form as an elephant, which was a result of his actions. Having done so, he assumed the form of a divine, terrifying serpent.

This serpent was fierce, powerful, and terrible, with a large body. He was black, like a vessel for melting lead and tin. His eyes were filled with poison and anger. He looked like a heap of kohl. His eyes were red. His forked tongue was restless, flickering out. Due to his blackness, he looked like the braid of the earth (the earth, personified as a woman). He spread his fierce, blazing, crooked, thick, rough, and terrifying hood. He hissed like a blacksmith's bellows. His fierce anger could not be restrained.

The god in the form of a serpent came to the place where the fasting hall was, where the ascetic Kamadeva was. Having come, he spoke to the ascetic Kamadeva, "O Kamadeva! If you do not abandon your conduct, your vows (renunciation, rejection, fasting), if you do not break them, I will immediately rush upon your body. Having rushed upon your body, I will wrap myself around your neck from behind with my sharp tail. Having wrapped myself around your neck, I will pierce your chest with my sharp, poisonous fangs. Just as you have been tormenting and harassing living beings untimely, you will be tormented and harassed untimely."

**[108]** When the ascetic Kamadeva heard these words spoken by the god in the form of a serpent, he remained steadfast in his meditation. The god spoke again, a second time, and a third time, but Kamadeva remained steadfast in his meditation.

**[109]** Then the god in the form of a serpent approached the ascetic Kamadeva, who remained steadfast. Having approached, he rushed upon Kamadeva's body. Having rushed upon his body, he wrapped himself around his neck from behind with his sharp tail. 

Page #143:
---------------------------
[102]
When the serpent-shaped god saw the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva fearless, he became extremely angry and, with a roar, climbed onto his body. Climbing up, he wrapped his body three times around Kamadeva's neck from behind. Wrapping around, he struck his chest with his sharp, poisonous teeth.
[110]
Then the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva endured that intense pain with patience. The defeat of the god: the victory of non-violence over violence
[111]
Then the serpent-shaped god, seeing the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva fearless, left him. Leaving, he did not harm the Shramanopasaka Kamadeva. The Nigganthas, the Pavanas, being moved, agitated, or transformed, were attracted to him again and again. Being attracted, they left their dwelling places. Leaving, they abandoned their divine serpent form. Abandoning that, they manifested a single, great, divine form.
[111]
(Wearing a garland of victory, a sword, a mace, a club, a bow, a quiver, a sword, a shield, a helmet, a necklace, a garland, a crown, a beautiful garment, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful garland, a beautiful
Page #144:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[103 In the assembly of the gods, in the palace of Indra, eighty-four thousand gods, including the thirty-three gods, the four Lokapalas, the eight chief queens with their families, the three groups of attendants, the seven Anuyogas, the seven Anuyoga-followers, and the eighty-four thousand Ayrakhadeva-gods] and many other gods and goddesses gathered together. They all thought, spoke, understood, and declared, "Oh gods! In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharata country, in the city of Champa, in the Samanovasa, in the Posha-sala, the Bhramayari, including the Umukkamani-Suvarna, the Vavgayamala-Vannaga-Vilevana, the Nikkhitta-Satta-Musala, the Ege, and the Abie, the Dvabha-Santharo-Vagaya, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira, the Dharma-Pannatti, the Uvasampannita, is residing. No god, demon, Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurisa, Mahoraga, Gandharva, or any other being can move, disturb, or change the Nirgranthas, the liberated ones."

Therefore, I, Indra, the king of the gods, came here, not being able to bear, not being able to tolerate, not being able to endure this. Oh, Dev-Anuppiya! I have obtained, achieved, and realized the desired, the wealth, the fame, the strength, the energy, and the human-excellence. Oh, Dev-Anuppiya! I have seen, obtained, and realized the desired, the wealth, the fame, the strength, the energy, and the human-excellence. Oh, Dev-Anuppiya! I beg your forgiveness, forgive me, Dev-Anuppiya! Forgive me, Dev-Anuppiya! I cannot bear this pain, I cannot bear this pain, I cannot bear this pain. With folded hands, I beg your forgiveness, I beg your forgiveness. I will go to the same direction, I will go to the same direction.

When the serpent-form god saw that the Samanovasaka Kamadeva was fearless and could not be moved, disturbed, or changed by the Nirgrantha teachings, he became tired, exhausted, and dejected. He slowly retreated, went out of the Posha-sala, and abandoned the serpent-form created by divine illusion. He then assumed a beautiful, divine form.

On his chest, a garland adorned him. He wore armlets and arm-guards on his arms, which kept his arms steady. His cheeks, adorned with saffron, musk, and other fragrant substances, were adorned with ear-ornaments and earrings. He wore various types of hand ornaments. On his head, he wore a crown adorned with various garlands. He wore a blessed, auspicious, unbroken, and excellent garment. He was adorned with auspicious and excellent garlands and fragrant substances like sandalwood, saffron, etc. His body was radiant. A garland made of flowers of all seasons hung from his neck to his knees. He possessed divine, god-like color, fragrance, form, touch, structure, body structure, body posture, wealth, flying vehicles, clothes, ornaments, and other divine wealth, radiance, and brilliance. 

Page #145:
---------------------------
[104]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
(The Upasaka, adorned with the qualities of family, etc., brilliance, luster, radiance, brilliance, splendor, and subtle essence, and with his self-perfection, illuminated the ten directions with his radiant aura, making them bright, luminous, and beautiful. He possessed a divine form, captivating and enchanting, a model to be emulated. Thus, he entered the feeding hall of the Upasaka Kamdeva.) Having entered and taken his place in the sky, the Upasaka, adorned with five excellent garments adorned with small bells, spoke to the Upasaka Kamdeva, saying, "Upasaka Kamdeva! Devānupriya, you are blessed, virtuous, accomplished, and possess auspicious qualities. Devānupriya! You have attained such understanding, faith, and belief in the Nirgrantha teachings. It is readily available to you, it is your own, and you have undoubtedly achieved the fruits of human birth and life.
Devānupriya! The story goes that Sakra, the powerful, the Devendra, the supreme lord of the gods, the most beautiful among the Devraj, (holding a vajra in his hand, the destroyer of the city of the Asuras, the protector of the city of Purandara, the one who in a previous birth as the merchant Kartika, had nurtured a hundred special acquisitions, the one with a thousand eyes, the controller of the thousand-eyed clouds, the destroyer of the enemy named Pak, the lord of the southern part of the world, the master of thirty-two million celestial chariots, the rider of the elephant Airavata, the lord of the gods, the one with pure garments like the sky, adorned with garlands, with beautiful, painted, and shimmering earrings adorning his cheeks, with a radiant body, and wearing a long garland of flowers, Indra, seated on his throne in the Sudharma assembly, within the Sudharma Kalpa, in the Sudharmavatansaka celestial chariot) surrounded by eighty-four thousand ordinary gods (thirty-three Guru-sthaniya Trayastrinsta gods, four Lokapalas, eight prominent Indra-like beings with their families, three councils, seven armies, seven army commanders, three hundred and thirty-six thousand guardian gods) and many other gods and goddesses, declared, spoke, proclaimed, or formulated this:
"Gods! In the Bharat Kshetra, within the Jambudvipa, in the city of Champa, the Upasaka Kamdeva, accepting nourishment in his feeding hall, observing celibacy (having renounced jewels, golden garlands, adornments, decorations, and the application of sandalwood and saffron, free from weapons, staffs, etc., solitary, unique, without any other companion), lies on a bed of kusa, engaged in meditation according to the teachings of the Angikrita Dharma-Prajnapti. No god, demon (Yaksha, Rakshasa, Kinnara, Kimpurusha, Mahoraga), Gandharva can cause him to deviate, disturb, or change from the Nirgrantha teachings.
I did not have faith, belief, or conviction in this statement of Sakra, Devendra, the king of the gods. It seemed distasteful to me. I came here quickly. Devānupriya! The power, brilliance, fame, strength, vigor, and manly prowess
1. White, yellow, red, blue, black. 

Page #146:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[105]
"I have seen all that you have achieved and acquired. Devānupriya! I beg your forgiveness. Devānupriya! Please forgive me. Devānupriya! You are capable of forgiving. I will never do this again." Saying this, he fell at his feet and repeatedly begged for forgiveness. After begging for forgiveness, he went back in the direction from which he had come.

**Discussion**

In this sūtra, the use of the word "vikūvvai" (reaction or transformation) in the context of the god assuming the forms of a demon, an elephant, and a serpent, indicates his divine body, which is a result of his birth as a god. In this context, it is important to know that Jain philosophy recognizes five types of bodies: audārika, vaikriya, āhārika, taijasa, and kārmaṇa. The vaikriya body is of two types: aupapātika and labdhipratyaya. The aupapātika vaikriya body is obtained from birth in the realm of gods and hell. There is a combination of past karma that results in birth in this form. The labdhipratyaya vaikriya body is obtained through special achievements gained through austerities, etc. This is found in the human realm and the realm of animals.

The vaikriya body does not contain impure substances like bones, marrow, flesh, and blood. Instead, these are transformed into desirable, radiant, mental, pleasant, and superior particles, forming the body. After death, the vaikriya body does not leave a corpse. Its particles disperse like camphor. As the word "vaikriya" suggests, this body can perform various reactions and specific actions, such as assuming multiple forms while being one, assuming one form while being multiple, making a small body large, making a large body small, assuming various types of bodies capable of moving on earth and in the sky, becoming invisible, etc.

The gods of the Saudharma and other heavenly realms are capable of performing all kinds of reactions or transformations: one, many, countable, uncountable, similar to themselves, dissimilar to themselves. They can assume all kinds of forms, from one sense to five senses, within these transformations.

In this case, the god assumed various forms to torment the ascetic Kamadeva. These were his "uttaravaikriya" forms, i.e., vaikriya bodies created based on his original vaikriya body. The reason why the god caused so much trouble to torment the ascetic Kamadeva is explained in this sūtra. That god was a "mithyādr̥ṣṭi" (one with false belief). Despite being a "mithyātvī" (one with false belief), he had attained the realm of gods due to his austerities in a previous life. However, due to his "mithyātvī" nature, he remained unfaithful to the "nirgrantha-pravacana" (the teachings of the liberated ones) or Jainism, even after becoming a god. Hearing Indra praise Kamadeva and seeing Kamadeva engrossed in intense religious devotion, he felt a burning hatred. This resulted in him inflicting cruel and intense suffering on Kamadeva to distract him from the "nirgrantha-pravacana." 

Page #147:
---------------------------
##  [106]

The *Upasakadasanga Sutra* unfolds. 

A deva, disguised as a demon, tore the body of Kamadeva into pieces with a sharp sword. Yet, Kamadeva did not waver from his devotion. The deva then assumed the form of a ferocious, monstrous elephant, tossing Kamadeva into the sky, crushing him with its teeth and trampling him with its feet. After this, he tormented him as a terrifying serpent. How was this possible? How could Kamadeva, even after his body was torn apart, be tossed into the sky, trampled, and crushed? Here is the explanation: The deva, a *mithyatvi*, wanted to inflict severe pain on Kamadeva to make him abandon his dharma. Or perhaps he wanted to test his religious steadfastness. He did not want to kill him. This is a characteristic of *vaikriya-labdhi* bearing devas: they can sever, cut, and break the *pudgalas* of the body with the same speed with which they can instantly reassemble them. This happens so quickly that the afflicted individual experiences intense pain and the feeling of being cut, but the state of separation or severance of the body's *pudgalas* is extremely short-lived. Therefore, the body appears to be the same in its gross form. This is what happened to Kamadeva.

Kamadeva endured the excruciating pain, but he did not deviate from his dharma. Then, the deva appeared in his original form and explained the reason for his malicious act of tormenting Kamadeva. There is a mention of three councils, a family of eight queens, seven armies, etc., in the description of Indra and his celestial entourage. Their details are as follows:

**The three councils of Indra, the ruler of the Saudharma heaven:**

* **Shamitha Abhyantara:** This inner council consists of twelve thousand devas and seven hundred devis.
* **Chanda Madhyama:** This middle council consists of fourteen thousand devas and six hundred devis.
* **Jata Bahya:** This outer council consists of sixteen thousand devas and five hundred devis.

**The position of the devas and devis in each council:**

* **Abhyantara:** Devas are positioned at five *palya* levels, and devis at three *palya* levels.
* **Madhyama:** Devas are positioned at four *palya* levels, and devis at two *palya* levels.
* **Bahya:** Devas are positioned at three *palya* levels, and devis at one *palya* level.

**The family of each chief queen:**

Each chief queen has a family of five thousand devis. Thus, Indra's inner circle is considered to have a family of forty thousand devis.

**The armies:**

* **Five armies for fighting:** Elephants, horses, bulls, chariots, and infantry.
* **Two armies for entertainment:** Gandharvanik (musicians) and Natyanik (actors) for amusement and boosting morale.

This sutra mentions some names of Indra, such as Shatakratu and Sahasraksha, which are also famous in the Vedic tradition. The reason and significance of these names according to the Jain tradition have been explained earlier. According to the Vedic tradition, the reason for these names is different. It is as follows: 

Page #148:
---------------------------


Page #149:
---------------------------
[108]
(The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra being recited) The man, the head of the family, having been informed, left his house. Having left, he went out through the middle of the city of Champa. Having gone out, he came to the Punnabhadda Cetiya, just as the conch-shell devotee comes to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira. Having come, he performed the three-fold circumambulation, bowing and prostrating. Having bowed and prostrated, he performed the five-fold Paryupasana.
The Shraman Upasaka Kamadeva, upon hearing that Bhagavan Mahavira had arrived, thought, "It is auspicious for me to bow and prostrate to the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira and then return to complete the fast." Thinking thus, he put on pure and assembly-worthy auspicious garments, (adorned his body with a few precious ornaments, and surrounded by a group of men with umbrellas adorned with garlands of fragrant flowers) he left his house. He went out and passed through the middle of the city of Champa, where the Punnabhadda Cetiya was (where the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira was), like a conch-shell devotee. He came and (performed three circumambulations, bowed and prostrated. Having bowed and prostrated, he performed the three-fold bodily, verbal, and mental) Paryupasana.
115. Then the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira gave a Dharma-katha to the Shraman Upasaka Kamadeva and the assembly. The praise of Kamadeva by the Bhagavan.
116. Kamadeva! The Samana Bhagavan Mahavira spoke to the Shraman Upasaka Kamadeva in this way: "Kamadeva! In the time of the past, in the time of the Ratnavara, you were a god in the Anta-paubbhua. Then that god manifested a great divine Pisaya-rupa. Having manifested, he took a great blue lotus, (a garland of fragrant flowers, a sword with a sharp edge) and holding it, he said to you, "O Kamadeva! As long as you live, you will be victorious. You, having been told this by that god, have been living accordingly.
These three Uvasaggas, adorned with praise, should be recited in the same way, until the god is satisfied. "Kamadeva! Is this true?" "Yes, it is true." 

Page #150:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[109] He appeared before you. That god took the form of a terrifying demon. Doing so, in great anger, he drew his sword (with a deep blue sharp edge like a blue lotus, buffalo horn, and flax flower) and said to you, "Kamadeva! If you do not break your vows of conduct and other vows, you will be separated from life." Even when spoken to thus by that god, you remained fearless in your devotion.

The three types of afflictions, with detailed descriptions, should be mentioned here in the aforementioned form until the god returns.

Lord Mahavira said, "Kamadeva, is this correct?" Kamadeva replied, "Lord! It happened just like that."

[117] On that day, the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira addressed many Samanas and Niganthas, and Niganthis as well, saying, "Aryas! If the Samana Upasaka, even while living in a household, endures the afflictions caused by gods, humans, and animals (bears them with patience and forbearance), then Aryas! It is possible for the Samanas, who study the twelve-fold Angas, the Ganipitaka, and the twelve Angas, to endure the afflictions caused by gods, humans, and animals (bear them with patience and forbearance)."

[118] Then, those many Samanas and Niganthas, and Niganthis as well, accepted this statement of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira with humility, saying, "It is so, Bhagavan!"

[119] Then, the Samana Upasaka Kamadeva, being very happy, asked questions of the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira and received clarification. He bowed and prostrated to the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira three times, and then, from the same direction he had come, he departed. 

Page #151:
---------------------------
1
110]
[The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra had arrived, it returned in the same direction.
120. Then the Samana Bhagavan Mahavira departed from Champa on one day, having departed, he wandered in other Janapadas. Kamadeva: Ascension to Heaven
121. Then the Samana Upasaka Kamadeva, having accepted the worship of the first Upasaka-Pratimas, wandered.
122. Then the Samana Upasaka Kamadeva, having cultivated himself with many (Sila-Vyay-Guna-Veraman-Pachakkhana-Posho-Upavasas), having attained the Samana Upasaka Paryaya for twenty years, having followed eleven Upasaka-Pratimas well, having cleansed himself with a month's Sanlekhana, having cut off food for sixty meals - a month's Anasana, having done Alochana, Pratikramana, having reached Samadhi at the time of death, he departed from the body. Having departed from the body, he was born in the Saudharma Devaloka, in the Arunabha Vimana, situated in the northeast corner of the Saudharmavatansaka Maha Vimana, in the form of a Deva. There, the lifespan of many Devas is four Palyopama. The lifespan of Kamadeva is also said to be four Palyopama in the form of a Deva.
123. Then, Bhante! Kamadeva, having passed through the Deva-Loka, the Bhava-Kshaya, the Thikka-Kshaya, where will he go, where will he be born? Gotama! He will be extinguished in the Mahavideha Vasa.
Nikkevo || The second study of the seventh Anga, the Upasaka Dasanga, is complete ||
1. Thus, Jambu! I say that this is the explanation of the second study of the Samana, up to the attainment of the two. 

Page #152:
---------------------------
## Second Study: The Story of Kamadeva

[111]
Gautama asked the Lord Mahavira, "Bhanta! When Kamadeva, from the realm of the gods, sheds his divine body due to the exhaustion of lifespan, existence, and state, where will he go? Where will he be born?" The Lord said, "Gautama! Kamadeva will become a Siddha in the Mahavideha-kshetra and attain liberation."

|| Conclusion || || End of the Second Study of the Upasaka Dasha in the Seventh Anga ||

Inference - The noble Sudharma said, "Jambu! The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira had explained the meaning of the second study of the Upasaka Dasha in this way, which I have told you." 

Page #153:
---------------------------
## Third Study Summary

Varanasi has been a rich and renowned city in India for millennia. Even today, it holds international significance in the field of education. During the time of Lord Mahavira, the king of Varanasi was named Jitasatru. Jitasatru's kingdom was vast. Associated descriptions suggest that cities like Champa were major cities within his kingdom. In those days, there used to be "Chaityas" on the outskirts of cities, where Acharyas, Sadhus, and Sannyasis who came to the city would stay. In Varanasi, there was a Chaitya called "Kosthak". Even today, there are gardens, temples, and resting places outside cities.

In Varanasi, a Gahapati named Chulnipita resided. His wife's name was Shyama. Chulnipita was an extremely wealthy, prosperous householder, his wealth exceeding even Anand and Kamadeva. He had eight crore gold coins in his treasury. It seems that in those days, very wealthy people kept some permanent capital that they did not use for any work. It was a secure fund to be used in adverse times. While wealth can increase significantly in trade and business, it can also decrease or even disappear entirely. Therefore, in their view, it was essential to have some capital that was kept separate and could be used when needed. This was a good division in the use and investment of their capital in those days. Chulnipita had invested eight crore gold coins in trade. His eight crore gold coins were used for household equipment, furnishings, and splendor. This was a balanced life of the wealthy people of that time; they invested in trade, kept some secure, and also invested in the grandeur, dignity, influence, and comfort of their homes in the same proportion. In those days, the population of the country was less, and there was a lot of land, so cattle rearing was prevalent in India on a large scale. The mention of Anand and Kamadeva having four and six Gokuls respectively has been found. There were eight Gokuls of Chulnipita, each with ten thousand cows. This vast wealth and movable and immovable property clearly indicate that Chulnipita was a very affluent man of that time.

When we read ancient literature, one thing becomes clear. Many men were owners of great wealth and prosperity, they had all kinds of material or worldly pleasures, but they did not get carried away by the intoxication of pleasures. They thought about that life in time, which is separate from wealth, prosperity, splendor, enjoyment, and luxury. But, it is real and useful.

Upon the arrival of Lord Mahavira, Anand and Kamadeva... 

Page #154:
---------------------------
## Third Study: Chulani Pita

[113] Having received the awakening to give, the same thing happened with Chulani Pita. When Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Varanasi during his Janapad-Vihar, Chulani Pita also heard Bhagwan's Dharmadeshana. He was inspired and accepted the Shravak-Dharma, molding his life into the mold of vows. He began to strive to continuously engage in his life in worship.

One day, he had accepted Brahmacharya and Poshad-Vrat and was engaged in worship in the Poshadshala. It was the middle of the night. A Dev appeared to cause an upsurge. Holding a sharp sword in his hand, he said to Chulani Pita, "Give up your vows, otherwise I will bring your eldest son from home. I will cut him into three pieces in front of you, boil them in a pot filled with boiling water, and sprinkle his boiling flesh and blood on your body."

A horrific scene was before Chulani Pita. There was the horror of his son's murder. Among worldly loved ones, a son holds a special place. It is not hidden from anyone how much affection a father has for his son. In Indian literature, it is even mentioned, "Sarvebhyo Jayamanvichchet Putraat Shishyaat Parajayam," meaning a father desires that his son may achieve such heights, progress so much that he may defeat him. Similarly, a Guru also desires that his disciple become so capable that he may overcome him.

In this context, when we think about it, there was a heart-wrenching horror before Chulani Pita, but he did not let his heart or emotions overpower his intellect. He remained steadfast in his worship. The Dev's anger boiled over. He created the same scene in an instant through Devmaya, as he had said. He sprinkled the boiling flesh and blood of his son on his body. This was a very terrible and at the same time, disgusting act. Even a heart of stone would break, but Chulani Pita remained steadfast.

The Dev became even more ferocious. He threatened again, "I have done what I said to your eldest son, I will do the same to your middle son. Accept it, abandon your worship!" But Chulani Pita did not panic. Then the Dev did the same to his middle son as he had done to his eldest son.

The Dev threatened Chulani Pita for the third time, "Your two sons have been eliminated, now it is the turn of the youngest. He will also suffer the same fate. Accept it now." But Chulani Pita remained steadfast. The Dev also finished off his youngest son and behaved in the same cruel and brutal manner. Chulani Pita was so engrossed in his worship that he had overcome the weaknesses of his heart to a great extent. Therefore, this brutal act of the Dev could not deter him from his path.

When the Dev saw that despite the brutal murder of his three sons, the Shraman Upasak Chulani Pita was engaged in Dharma Upasana with unwavering devotion, he thought of another extremely horrific measure. He said to him in threatening words, "You will not accept this, now I will bring your mother, Bhadra Sarthavahi here, who is worshiped by you like a Dev and a Guru, who has endured many hardships in raising you, who is the ultimate... 

Page #155:
---------------------------
[114]
The Upasakadasanga Sutra is a religious text. I will cut it into three pieces with this sharp sword in front of you. Just as your sons were boiled in a cauldron of boiling water, I will boil it too, and in the same way, I will splash your body with its boiling flesh and blood.
At the time of the brutal murder of his three sons, his heart did not waver even a little, he remained deeply engrossed in religious meditation with utmost firmness and devotion. When the question of the murder of his revered and affectionate mother came before him, his patience broke. He thought to himself, this wicked man will do such a vile act before my very eyes. This can never happen. I will catch this wicked man right now. Thus, enraged, Chulani Pita got up to catch him, his hands outstretched. It was a conspiracy of the gods. That god disappeared into the sky and the pillar of the Poshadshala came into Chulani Pita's hands, which was in front of him. Chulani Pita was stunned. He started shouting loudly.
When Bhadra Sarthavahi heard this noise, she came there immediately and said to her son, what happened, why are you doing this? Chulani Pita told her the whole incident that had happened. His mother said, son! This was a calamity caused by the gods, it was all divine illusion. Everyone is safe, no one was killed. You broke your vow in anger. You made this mistake, you will have to do penance for it, so that you can be purified. Chulani Pita accepted his mother's words. He accepted penance.
The human mind is very weak. The devotee is expected to be vigilant every moment. As soon as a little caution is broken, weakness arises in the heart. The devotee deviates from his path. It is not impossible to make a mistake with someone, but when the mistake is known, the person should become aware immediately, he should feel internal regret for that mistake. He should be determined that it should not happen again. The above incident sheds light on all these things. Thus.
Chulani Pita continued to progress in the worship of religion. He nurtured his soul through vows and worship, followed the Shravak Dharma for twenty years, worshipped the eleven Upasak images properly, completed the final Sanlekhana of one month and fasting of one month, and gave up his body in Samadhi. He was born as a god in the Arunaprabha Vimana in the Saudharma Devaloka. 

Page #156:
---------------------------
## Third Study

**Chulani Pita 124.**  This is the beginning of the third study, with an introduction and preface:

Arya Sudharma said, "Jambū! At the end of the fourth Āra of the present Avasarpini, at that time, when Bhagavan Mahāvīra was alive, there was a city called Vārāṇasī. There was a shrine called Koṣṭhaka. The king there was named Jitasatru. The Shraman Upasaka Chulani Pita...

**125.**  ...lived in the city of Vārāṇasī. He was very wealthy and influential. His wife's name was Shyama. He had eight crore gold coins in his treasury as permanent capital, eight crore gold coins invested in trade and business, and eight crore gold coins invested in the wealth and splendor of his home, including grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, and other resources. He had eight...

1. "If, Venerable Sir, Bhagavan has explained the meaning of the second study of the Upasaka Dasha, which is about wealth, then, Venerable Sir, what is the meaning of the third study?" 
2. Arya Sudharma asked Jambū, "If Bhagavan Mahāvīra, who has attained Siddhi, has explained the meaning of the second study of the Upasaka Dasha, then, Venerable Sir, what meaning did he explain for the third study?" (Please tell me)
3. See Sutra number 3
4. See Sutra number 5
5. See Sutra number 92 

Page #157:
---------------------------
##  [116]
The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra was about Gokul. Each Gokul had ten thousand cows. Like the Gahapati Anand, the king, the wealthy man, and other distinguished people, he was a promoter, a person who increased all kinds of activities through good advice and other means.
Lord Mahavira arrived, and a Samavasarana was held. A congregation gathered to listen to the Lord's Dharma-Deshana. Like Anand, the Chulani-pita also came out of his house and came to serve the Lord. Like Anand, he also accepted the Shravak Dharma.
Just as Gautam had asked questions of the Lord regarding Anand, he also asked questions about the future life of Chulani-pita. The Lord gave the solution.
The further event is like the Gahapati Kamadeva. Chulani-pita, accepting the Brahmacharya and Poshad of the Poshadshala, became devoted to the worship of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, in accordance with the Angikrit Dharma-Pragyapti-Dharma teachings.

##  [126]
Therefore, at the time of the early morning, during the time of the Shraman-Upasaka Chulani-pita's residence, a Dev appeared before him.

##  [127]
Then that Dev, taking out a large blue sword with a sharp edge, said to the Shraman-Upasaka Chulani-pita, just as the Dev in the form of a Pisach had said to Kamadeva, "O Chulani-pita! Shraman-Upasaka! If you do not break your vows, then today I will take your eldest son from your house. I will take him and kill him in front of you. I will cut his body into three pieces of flesh and boil them in a cauldron filled with boiling water or oil. I will sprinkle your body with his flesh and blood, so that you will be tormented by great pain and suffering and die prematurely."

1. See Sutra number 116. 2. See Sutra number 107. 

Page #158:
---------------------------
## Third Study: Chulani Pita

[117. Sitting. The Fearlessness of Chulani Pita]
[128. Even when the Dev spoke thus to the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita, he remained steadfast in his Dharma-Dhyana.]
[129. Seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita fearless, the Dev spoke to him again, and then a third time. But Chulani Pita remained steadfast in his Dharma-Dhyana, saying, "I am here." ]
[130. Seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita fearless, the Dev became enraged. He brought Chulani Pita's eldest son from his home, killed him in front of him, cut his body into three pieces, boiled them in a cauldron of boiling water, and then sprinkled Chulani Pita's body with his son's flesh and blood.]
[131. The Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita endured this intense pain with equanimity.]
[132. Seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita fearless, the Dev... 
1. See Sutra number 98. 2. See Sutra number 97. 3. See Sutra number 97. 4. See Sutra number 97. 5. See Sutra number 106. 6. See Sutra number 97. 

Page #159:
---------------------------


Page #160:
---------------------------
## Third Study: Chulani Pita

[119] The term "Janani" signifies the respect, honor, and reverence for mothers in Indian tradition. A mother's service to her offspring creates a debt that cannot be repaid in any way. Therefore, this term points to the divine reverence and respect accorded to mothers.

Dr. Rudolf Hornle, based on an old interpretation, has defined "Dev-Guru" as the Guru of the Gods - Brihaspati. Thus, according to him, a mother is as worthy of worship as Brihaspati.

The literature of all Indian traditions acknowledges the extraordinary importance of a mother. According to the saying "Janani Janmabhumischa Swargadapi Gariyasi," a mother and one's homeland are considered greater than heaven. Manu has given even greater glory to a mother. He has considered a mother a thousand times more important than a father.

The Taittiriya Upanishad mentions that after completing his studies, when a teacher instructs his student for future life, he specifically tells him, "Consider your mother as equal to a deity, consider your father as equal to a deity, consider your teacher as equal to a deity, consider a guest as equal to a deity, perform blameless and faultless actions, do not perform blameworthy or faulty actions, follow the good conduct or excellent character served by your teachers."

Jain and Buddhist literature also consider a mother to hold a very high position. This particular adjective used here clearly reflects this aspect of Indian thought.

[134] Even after being told this by the deity, the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita remained fearless and absorbed in his religious meditation.

[135] The deity then saw the Shramanopasaka Chulani Pita meditating fearlessly. Seeing him, the deity said, "Oh Chulani Pita! Shramanopasaka! You will continue to live like this (in the eight states of existence - Attha-Duhatta-Vasatte Akale Cheva Jiviyao) until you are liberated."

1. The Uvasagadasao Lecture III Page 94
Upadhyayaandasacharya Aacharyananam Shatam Pita. Sahastraam Tu Pitrun Maata Gauravenaatirichyate.
- Manusmriti 2. 145 3. Matrudevo Bhava. Pitrudevo Bhava. Aaryadevo Bhava. Atithidevo Bhava. Yaanyavadyani Karmaani, Taani Sevitavyani, No Itrani. Yaanyasmaakam Sucharitani, Taani Twayopasyani.
- Taittiriya Upanishad Valli 1. Anuvaak 11.2 4. See Sutra-Sankhya 98. 5. See Sutra-Sankhya 97.
2. 

Page #161:
---------------------------
[120]
The Devata, seeing the Shramanopasaka Chulani-pita fearless, said the same thing for the second time, and for the third time, "Shramanopasaka Chulani-pita! You will die prematurely (due to the pain of intense meditation and severe suffering). The anger of Chulani-pita: uproar
[136] Then, the Shramanopasaka Chulani-pita, being addressed in this way by the Devata, thought, "Oh, these men are wicked, wicked in their thoughts, wicked in their actions, they are accumulating evil karma. They brought my eldest son home and killed him in front of me (cut him into three pieces of flesh, boiled him in a cauldron filled with boiling water), they sprinkled my body with his flesh and blood. They brought my middle son home (killed him in front of me, cut him into three pieces of flesh, boiled him in a cauldron filled with boiling water, sprinkled my body with his flesh and blood). They brought my youngest son home, and in the same way, they sprinkled my body with his flesh and blood. They also want to bring my mother, Bhadra Sathvahi, who is worthy of worship like a Devata and Guru, who performs very difficult tasks for my benefit, who performs very difficult actions, home and kill her in front of me. Therefore, it is good that I catch this man." Thinking this, he ran to catch him. In the meantime, the Devata flew up into the sky. Chulani-pita's outstretched hands caught the pillar. He began to make a loud noise. The arrival of the mother: curiosity
[137] Then, Bhadra Sathvahi heard the noise and thought, "What is the reason for this uproar of Chulani-pita?
1. See Sutra number 136. 

Page #162:
---------------------------
The Third Study: The Chulani Pita

[121]
When the Samanovasaya heard the commotion, he went to where the Chulani Pita was and said, "Son! Why are you shouting so loudly?"

The Chulani Pita's Reply

[138]
The Samanovasaya, the Chulani Pita, said to his mother, the Bhadra Sathvahi, "Mother! I don't know who that man was, but he was very angry. He drew a large blue sword and said to me, 'O Chulani Pita, the Samanovasaya, the seeker of the path! If you do not abandon and break your vows today (the vows of Sila, Vrata, Veramanai, Pacchakkhanai, and Poshadhopavasa), then you will be tormented by great suffering and die prematurely.'

[139]
When that man said this to me, I remained fearless and continued my meditation.

[140]
Seeing me meditating fearlessly, that man came near me and said to me again, and again, "O Chulani Pita, the Samanovasaya! I will do as I said, I will drench your body in blood and flesh." And he did just that.

[141]
I endured all the pain, the intense, unbearable, sharp, fierce, agonizing, and unbearable suffering with equanimity, forgiveness, patience, and forbearance. I endured it all. 

Page #163:
---------------------------


Page #164:
---------------------------
## Third Study: The Chulani Pita

[123]
When that man said it for the second time, the third time, this thought arose in my mind: "Oh! This wicked, low-minded man has committed such heinous sins. He brought my eldest son, my middle son, and my youngest son from home, and he killed them, staining my body with their flesh and blood. Now he wants to bring you (the mother) from home and kill you in front of me. Therefore, it is best that I capture this man." Thinking this, I rose to capture him, but he flew into the sky. My outstretched hands grasped only a pillar. I cried out loudly.

## Atonement by the Chulani Pita

[146]
Then the noble Sāthavāhi, the Shramanopāsaka Chulani Pita, spoke to her: "Son! There was no man who brought your eldest son from home and killed him in front of you. There was no man who brought your youngest son from home and killed him in front of you. This was a divine affliction for you. Therefore, you saw this terrible sight. Now your vows, rules, and observances are broken, shattered. Therefore, son! You should criticize this conduct of breaking your vows, (perform Pratikramaṇa - return to a pure inner state, condemn this tendency, reproach yourself - feel inner remorse and purify the faults arising from it, be ready for appropriate atonement) and accept the Tapas Karma for it."

## Discussion

The passage mentions that the Shramanopāsaka Chulani Pita's three sons were killed in front of her by a sword and boiled in a cauldron of boiling water. This was not a real event, but a divine affliction. This is explained in the case of Kāmadeva. 

Page #165:
---------------------------
## Chapter 124

The Upasakadasanga Sutra has been discussed. The main point is that Chulani Pita ultimately deviated from his vows. It is essential for a Vrati or Upasaka to be vigilant at every moment, aware of the proper observance of their rules. Even so, there are certain human weaknesses, and the Upasaka's steadfastness sometimes breaks.

Inspired by a Guru, a revered person, or by self-motivation, the Upasaka suddenly becomes aware and strives to prevent such an undesirable incident from happening again in life. He remembers his resolve. He becomes as firm as a mountain. To prevent the breaking of his resolve and vows, the scriptures prescribe atonement. The Upasaka delves into his inner self, reflecting on his nature, conduct, vows, and state. In this context, the words Aalochana, Pratikramana, Ninda, and Garda are used specifically, as they are used here. While these words are generally synonymous, they have their own unique characteristics upon closer examination. This self-purifying process in the Jain tradition has its own special form, behind which lies profound psychological thinking.

The intention of Aalochana is to confess one's mistake to the Guru. This is very beneficial. It washes away the inner dirt. The word Pratikramana also has its own significance. The Upasaka addresses himself, saying, "Atman! Return to yourself, where have you gone astray?" Then comes the matter of Ninda. The Upasaka, as a witness to his own soul, silently condemns his mistake within himself. He reflects on how such a bad act could have been committed by him. He openly condemns his mistake, either directly or through feelings, which is called Garda, a very inspiring form of experiencing inner regret. To completely eradicate the thought process that led to the mistake, the Upasaka resolves to do so. Ultimately, he accepts some penance as atonement.

From a psychological perspective, this is a beautiful process that prevents such mistakes from happening again, as far as possible. The weaknesses that led to such mistakes are eliminated in some form or another.

In the present context, Chulani Pita's mother told him, "Your vows, rules, and Poshadha have been broken." The commentator explains the breaking of vows, etc., as follows: Generally, a Shravaka renounces the killing of innocent beings in the Ahimsa vow, but in Poshadha, he also renounces the killing of guilty beings. Chulani Pita, in anger, ran to destroy the tormentor, thereby violating the vow of abstaining from killing large-bodied beings in thought. This was the reason for his breaking of the vow. In Poshadha, one also renounces anger, but due to anger, the rule of Uttaraguna was broken. The breaking of the vow of non-engagement led to the breaking of Poshadha. Thus, due to the breaking of vows, rules, and Poshadha, it was necessary to perform Aalochana, etc., for purification.

## Chapter 147

Therefore, Chulani Pita, the Samana, went to his mother, the virtuous and wise Bhaddā, and said, "Thus..." 

Page #166:
---------------------------
## Third Study: The Chulanipita

[125. The Shramanopasaka Chulanipita listened to his mother, Bhadra Sार्थवाही, saying, "You are right," and respectfully accepted her words. Upon hearing this, he reflected upon the nature of the transgression, the violation of vows, the breach of rules, and the transgression of the dietary restrictions at that place, and accepted the appropriate penance in the form of austerities. The end of his life was filled with devotion.]

148. Then, the Shramanopasaka Chulanipita, like Anand, practiced the first, (second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and) eleventh Upasaka-Pratimas in due order.

149. Then, the Shramanopasaka Chulanipita, like Kamadeva, (cultivated himself through numerous virtues, good conduct, restraints, renunciations, and dietary observances, practiced the Shramanopasaka-Pariyaya for twenty years, properly performed the eleven Upasaka-Pratimas, underwent a one-month Sanlekhana, observed a one-month fast, reflected upon his actions, performed Pratikramana, and at the time of death, relinquished his body in Samadhi, thus, as a result of intense austerities,) was born as a Deva in the Arunaprabha Vimana, located in the northeast corner of the Mahavimana of the Saudharma Avtansaka, in the Saudharma Devaloka. His lifespan there is said to be four Palyopama. He will attain Siddhi in the Mahavideha realm.

||Nikkhevo|| ||The third study of the Upasaka-Dasha of the seventh Anga is complete.||

1. See Sutra number 87. 2. Thus, Jambū! This is the meaning of the third study of the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Shraman, as I have told you. 3. Conclusion: The Arya Sudharma said, "Jambū! This is the meaning of the third study of the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, which I have told you." 

Page #167:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study
## Summary

There was a wealthy merchant named Suradev in the city of Varanasi. He was very prosperous. He had six crore gold coins in his treasury, six crore in his business, and six crore in his household wealth. His wife's name was Dhanya.

By a fortunate coincidence, Lord Mahavira arrived in Varanasi. A Samavasarana was held. Like everyone else, Suradev also embraced the Shravak Dharma. He progressed further and further in his religious practices.

One day, Suradev was engaged in meditation, observing Brahmacharya and Poshad in the Poshadshala. It was midnight when a deity appeared before him. He held a sharp sword in his hand. He threatened and intimidated Suradev to stop his meditation. When Suradev refused, the deity killed his three sons one by one, in the same way that the deity had killed the sons of the Chulani father in the story. Each time, he cut the body of each son into five pieces, boiled them in a cauldron of boiling water, and sprinkled the boiling flesh and blood on Suradev. But Suradev's determination did not waver. He continued his meditation with unwavering courage.

The deity thought, "He is not being swayed by the pain of losing his sons. So, I must now inflict suffering on his body." Thinking that nothing is dearer to a human than their body, the deity said to Suradev in harsh words, "I have killed your sons in front of you, and you didn't care. Now, watch as I inflict suffering on you. I tell you, abandon your vows, or I will inflict sixteen terrible diseases on your body at once: asthma, cough, fever, burning sensation, abdominal pain, fistula, piles, indigestion, eye disease, headache, loss of appetite, pain in the eyes, pain in the ears, itching, stomach disease, and leprosy. Your body will rot from these diseases, and you will be consumed by their unbearable pain."

Suradev, who had not been shaken by witnessing the murder of his sons, trembled at the mere mention of the diseases that would befall him. The thought of his body being consumed by these terrible diseases and becoming like a living corpse filled him with fear. His courage suddenly broke. The horror of a life afflicted by disease terrified him. He thought, "I must catch the evil being who wants to make me like this." He stretched out his hands to catch him. But it was a divine illusion. How could he catch him? The deity vanished into the sky. The pillar of the Poshadshala that was in front of Suradev came into his hands. Suradev was stunned. He couldn't understand what had happened. He cried out loudly... 

Page #168:
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Suradeva]
[127] He started shouting.
When Suradeva's wife Dhanya heard this shouting, she immediately came to the dining hall and asked her husband what was wrong? Why are you doing this? To this, Suradeva told Dhanya the whole incident. Dhanya was very intelligent. She told her husband that this was a dev-upsarg to make you deviate from your dharma. Your sons are safe. The talk of causing disease in your body was nothing but a threat. You broke your vow out of fear, this was a sin, you should purify yourself by doing penance. Suradeva readily accepted his wife's words. He criticized himself for his mistake, accepted penance.
Suradeva's subsequent life was more and more dynamic in the worship of dharma like Chulani Pita. He followed the vows properly, followed the Shravak-dharma for twenty years, worshipped the eleven Upasak-pratima properly, completed the final Sanlekhana of one month and one month of fasting, and gave up his body peacefully. He was born in the form of a deva in the Arunakant Vimana in the Saudharma Devaloka.
★★ 

Page #169:
---------------------------
## Fourth Study
## Suradeva

**150.** The beginning of the fourth study, with an introduction. Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city called Vārāṇasī. There was a shrine called Koṣṭhaka. The king there was named Jitasatru. There was a householder named Suradeva. He was very wealthy. Six crore gold coins were in his treasury as permanent capital. (Six crore gold coins were invested in business, six crore gold coins were invested in the splendor of his home - wealth, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, etc. resources. He had six cow-herds. Each cow-herd had ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Dhanyā.

The Lord Mahāvīra arrived and a Samvasarana took place. Like Ānand, Suradeva also accepted the lay-disciple dharma. Like Kāmadeva, he became devoted to the worship of the Lord Mahāvīra, following the Dharma-Prajñapti-Dharma-Shiksha.

**151.** Then, during the time of Suradeva's lay-discipleship, in the early morning, some gods came to him. Those gods, holding a large blue lotus, approached Suradeva, the lay-disciple.

1. If, O Venerable One! The Lord, the Samana, has explained the meaning of the third study of the lay-disciple state, then what meaning did he explain for the fourth study? (Please tell me.)
2. See Sutra - Number 92
3.
Sudharma asked Jambū - If the Lord Mahāvīra, who has attained Siddhi, has explained this meaning - the intention of the third study of the lay-disciple state, then, O Venerable One! What meaning did he explain for the fourth study? (Please tell me.)
4. See Sutra - Number 116. 

Page #170:
---------------------------


Page #171:
---------------------------
[130]
I will cause sixteen terrible diseases to arise in you, such as pain in the ears, itching, abdominal diseases, dropsy, and leprosy, which will cause you to suffer from great pain and anguish, and you will die prematurely.
[153]
When the Suradeva said this, the Shramanopasaka remained unmoved, fearless, undisturbed, calm, and tranquil, absorbed in his meditation. The deva spoke again, and again, saying, "If you do not abandon your vows of conduct, fasting, restraint, renunciation, and observance of the fast, I will inflict sixteen terrible diseases upon your body, and you will die prematurely, suffering from great pain and anguish."
[154]
When the Suradeva spoke thus, the Shramanopasaka thought, "This wicked man (who took my eldest son from home, killed him in front of me, cut him into five pieces, boiled him in a cauldron filled with boiling water, and smeared my body with his flesh and blood), and who desires to inflict these sixteen diseases upon me, I will not be afraid of him." He then became angry, and his body trembled, and he made a great noise.
1. See Sutra number 145. 

Page #172:
---------------------------
Fourth Study: Suradeva]
[131 Sprinkling-sprinkling, my middle son was brought home, he was beaten in front of me, his five flesh-pieces were made, boiled in a cauldron filled with boiling water, my body was sprinkled with his flesh and blood, who brought my younger son home, he was killed in front of me, his five flesh-pieces were made, boiled in a cauldron filled with boiling water, my body was sprinkled with his flesh and blood,) wants to cause sixteen terrible diseases in my body. Therefore, it is best for me, I should catch this man. Thinking so, he got up to catch. In the meantime, that god flew into the sky. A pillar came in the outstretched hands of Suradeva to catch. He started shouting loudly.
155. Then Dhannya, the wife of Suradeva, heard this noise, and went where Suradeva was. Coming, she said to her husband-Devanupriya! Why did you shout so loudly? Conclusion of life
156. Then Suradeva, who was in the Samaṇovās, said to his wife Dhannya-Thus, Devanupriya! No man, he says like the Chulani father. Dhannya also replies, until the end. No, Devanupriya! No man is causing sixteen diseases in your body at the same time, this is some kind of affliction for you. He said everything like the Chulani father.
_ Thus, everything is like the Chulani father, without any difference, until the end, in the Sohamme Kalpa, in the Arunkanta Vimana, in the Uvavanne. Standing in four Paliovam. He lives in Mahavideha.
Nikkhevo || The fourth study of the seven limbs of the Uvasagadasanas is complete ||
The Shramanopasaka Suradeva told his wife Dhannya the whole incident in the same way as the Chulani father had told. Dhannya said Devanupriya! No one killed your elder, middle and younger sons. No man is causing sixteen terrible diseases in your body at the same time. This is some kind of affliction for you. He said everything else the same way as it was said to the Chulani father.
The whole further incident is like that of the Chulani father. In the end, Suradeva, after giving up his body, goes to Sodharma
1. See Sutra-number 154. 2. See Sutra-number 149. 3. Thus, Jambū! I know that this is the end of the fourth study with the Samaṇas and wealth.

Page #173:
---------------------------
[132]
[Upasakadasangasutra
In the Kalpa, he was born in the Arunakant Vimana. His lifespan is said to be four Palyopama. He will become a Siddha in the Mahavideha-Kshetra - he will attain liberation.
|| Nikshepa || || The fourth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha, is complete ||
1. Nigamana Ary Sudharma said, "Jambhu! The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said this meaning and sentiment of the fourth study of Upasakadasha, which I have told you." 

Page #174:
---------------------------
## Fifth Study Summary

There was a city named Alavhika in North India. There was a garden called Shankhavan in that city. Jitashatru was the king of that city. In that city, a wealthy merchant named Chullashatak resided. He had six crore gold coins secured in his treasury, an equal amount engaged in trade, and an equal amount used for the splendor and equipment of his home. He had six Gokuls of ten thousand cows each.

Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira once arrived in Alavhika during his Janapad-Vihar. Like other people, Chullashatak also went to see him. He was impressed by his Dharma-Deshana and accepted the Grihastha-Dharma or Shravak-Vrat.

Even while living as a householder, Chullashatak was very interested in the worship of Vrats and Dharma. There was a beautiful harmony of the worldly and the spiritual in his life. He continued to perform Vrat-Sadhana-Abhyas, etc. One day, he was engrossed in Dharma-Upasana, having accepted Brahmacharya and Poshad-Vrat in the Poshadshala. It was midnight, when suddenly a Dev appeared before him. He wanted to distract Chullashatak from his Sadhana. Just as it happened with Chulni-Pita, the same thing happened to Chullashatak at the hands of this Dev. The Dev killed his three sons in front of him, cutting them into seven pieces each. He sprinkled their blood and flesh on him. But Chullashatak was elevated above both affection and anger. Therefore, he did not deviate from his Vrat. He remained engrossed in Dharma-Dhyan.

The Dev then thought, "In the world, everyone has a great attachment and affection for wealth. Humans can bear everything, but the blow of wealth is heavy for them. Therefore, I should do the same to him now." The Dev spoke to Chullashatak in an angry and harsh voice, "Accept it, break your Vrats. Look, if you don't break them, I will take your six crore gold coins from your treasury and scatter them all over the streets and crossroads of Alavhika city. You will become a beggar and a pauper. You will become so distressed and sorrowful that you will not be able to live!" Even after hearing this, Chullashatak remained steadfast in his Dharma-Sadhana.

The Dev said the same thing again in a thunderous voice, and then a third time. Chullashatak, who was until now steady in his Upasana, suddenly trembled. A lightning-like flash ran through his entire body, and the terrifying vision of impending poverty began to dance before his eyes. He became frightened. The thought kept coming to his mind, "There is nothing in this world that cannot be achieved with wealth." The one who has wealth... 

Page #175:
---------------------------
[134]
The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra is the friend, the relative, the human being, the wise one.
The heat of wealth is a strange heat, which keeps a human being strong, energetic, courageous, everything. When it leaves, the same senses, the same name, the same intellect, the same speech, with all these remaining, the human being becomes something else.
In his panic, Chullashataka did not realize that he was in a fast. Therefore, he was furious at the man who was about to lose his wealth and he lunged to grab him. He got nothing but the pillar standing in the dining hall. The god disappeared. Chullashataka was bewildered. He could not understand what had happened. Due to his anxiety, he started shouting loudly. Hearing his shouts, his wife Bahula came there and when she heard the whole story from her husband, she said - This was your test. It was a divine affliction. You were very firm. But, in the end, you slipped. Your fast is broken. Criticize, repent, accept atonement and purify yourself. Chullashataka did the same and received inspiration to remain steadfast in the observance of dharma in the future.
Chullashataka's subsequent life was progressively more and more devoted to fasting like Chulani Pita. He observed Anuvrata, Gunavrata, Shikshavrata etc. with proper worship and followed the Shravak dharma for twenty years. He worshipped eleven Shravak images properly. He gave up his body after a month of final Sanlekhana fasting and meditation. He was born in the Saudharma Devaloka in the Arun Siddha Vimana in the form of a god.
1. There is nothing that is not achieved by means.
Therefore, one should strive to achieve one's goal with intelligence.
Those who have wealth have friends, those who have wealth have relatives.
He who has wealth is a man in the world, he who has wealth is wise.
Panchatantra 1.2, 3
2. Those senses are unimpaired, that is the name,
That intellect is unimpaired, that is the speech.
A man devoid of the heat of wealth is the same,
It is strange that he becomes another in a moment.
Hitopadeśa 1.127 

Page #176:
---------------------------
The Fifth Study
Chullaratak Shramanopasak Chullashatak
157. This is the beginning of the fifth study. Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city named Ālamikā. There was a garden called Sankhavaṇa. The king there was named Jitasatru. In that city, there lived a wealthy and influential man named Chullasataka. (He had six crore gold coins in his treasury, six crore gold coins in his business, and six crore gold coins in his home for luxury and furnishings.) He had six herds of cows. Each herd had ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Bahulā.
The Lord Mahāvīra arrived - the Samvasaraṇa took place. Like Ānanda, Chullasataka also accepted the Shravaka-Dharma. The subsequent events are like those of Kāmadeva. He, like Kāmadeva, became devoted to the worship of the Lord Mahāvīra, following the teachings of the Angīkṛta Dharma-Prajñapti. Obstacles created by the Devas
158. Then, at the time of the early morning, for that Shramanopasaka Chullasataka,
1. "O Venerable One! The Venerable Lord Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the fourth study of the Upasakadasha, but Venerable One! What is the meaning of the fifth study?" 2. See Sutra number 33. Ārya Sudharma asked Jambū - "The Siddhi-prapta Lord Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the fourth study of the Upasakadasha, but Venerable One! What is the meaning of the fifth study?" (Please tell me.) 

Page #177:
---------------------------
[136]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
A deva appeared before the Chullasaya Samanovasaya and said, "O Chullasaya Samanovasaya! If you do not abandon your vows, I will take your eldest son from your home today."
Just as it happened with the Chullani father, the same thing happened here. The deva killed the eldest, middle, and youngest sons, cutting them into pieces. He splattered the Chullasaya's body with flesh and blood.
The only difference was that the deva had cut the bodies into five pieces there, but here he cut them into seven pieces.
[159]
The Chullasaya Samanovasaya remained steadfast in his vows.
Threat of Wealth Destruction
[160]
The deva then said to the Chullasaya Samanovasaya for the fourth time, "O Chullasaya Samanovasaya! If you do not abandon your vows, I will take your six crore gold coins kept in your treasury, your six crore gold coins used in your business, and your six crore gold coins used for your home's wealth and decorations. I will bring them and scatter them all over the city of Alambika, in the Shringatak (triangular) places, Trik-Tirahas (three-way intersections), Chatusk-Chaurahas (four-way intersections), Chatvar (where more than four roads meet), Chaturbhuj (where four roads diverge), and Mahapath (major roads or highways). I will scatter them everywhere, so that you will be forced to wander in distress, seeking your wealth.
1. See Sutra - Number 116
2. See Sutra - Number 107
3. See Sutra - Number 154.
4. See Sutra - Number 154.
5. See Sutra - Number 98. 

Page #178:
---------------------------
[137
Fifth Study: Chullashataka] and you will be afflicted with great suffering and die prematurely.
161. Even though the Devata said this, the Shramanopasaka Chullashataka remained fearless in his devotion.
162. When the Devata saw the Shramanopasaka Chullashataka fearless, he said the same thing to him a second time, a third time, and threatened him, "You will lose your life!"  
163. When the Devata said this to the Shramanopasaka Chullashataka a second time and a third time, the Shramanopasaka thought, "Oh, this man is like a Chulani-pita. He has killed my three sons, the eldest, the middle, and the youngest, and has soaked the ground with their flesh and blood. Now he wants to take my six crore gold coins kept in the treasury, six crore gold coins used in business, and six crore gold coins used in the wealth and ornaments of the house, and scatter them in the triangular places of the city of Alambika. Therefore, it is better for me to catch this man." Thinking this, he ran to catch him like a Suradeva.
The same thing happened as happened with Suradeva. Like Suradeva's wife, 
1. See Sutra number 153. 2. See Sutra number 97. 3. See Sutra number 154. 4. See Sutra number 154. 5. See Sutra number 160. 

Page #179:
---------------------------
[138]
His wife also asked him everything. He told her the whole story.
Divine - Motion
[Upasakadasangasutra
164. Just as the Chullani-pita went, so he also attained the Arun-siddh vimāna in the Saudharma devlōka after abandoning his body. His lifespan there is said to be four palya-upamas. The subsequent events are also the same. (O Bhagavan! Where will the Chullasataka go after the exhaustion of his lifespan, existence, and state from that devlōka? Where will he be born? Gautama!) He will become a Siddha in the Mahavideha-kṣetra - he will attain liberation.
Nikkheva
|| The fifth study of the seventh anga Upasakadasa is complete ||
The subsequent events are like those of the Chullani-pita. After abandoning his body, the Chullasataka was born as a deva in the Arun-siddh vimāna in the Saudharma devlōka. His lifespan there is said to be four palya-upamas. The subsequent events are also the same. (O Bhagavan! Where will the Chullasataka go after the exhaustion of his lifespan, existence, and state from that devlōka? Where will he be born? Gautama!) He will become a Siddha in the Mahavideha-kṣetra - he will attain liberation.
|| Nikṣepa ||
|| The fifth study of the seventh anga Upasakadasa is complete ||
1. See Sutra - number 149.
2. And thus, Jambū! I declare that this is the meaning of the fifth study of the Upasakadasa as explained by the Shraman.
3. Conclusion - - Ārya Sudharma said, Jambū! The Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira said this meaning of the fifth study of the Upasakadasa, which I have told you. 

Page #180:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study Summary

Kundakaulika, a wealthy householder, resided in Kampilya. His wife's name was Pūṣā. Kampilya was an ancient city in India. During the time of Lord Mahāvīra, it was very prosperous and famous. Today, there is still a village called Kampil on the banks of the old Ganges between Badaun and Farrukhabad in Uttar Pradesh, which historians believe is the present form of Kampilya. Kampilya is mentioned in many places in the Āgama literature and was in the kingdom of King Jitasatru, a contemporary of Lord Mahāvīra. There was a garden called Sahasrāmrāvana. It is possible that gardens were named after the number of mango trees they had.

Kundakaulika was a wealthy and happy householder. He had eighteen crore gold coins, of which six crore were kept in the treasury as secure wealth, six crore were invested in business, and six crore were used for the splendor and furnishings of his home. He had six Gokulas, each with ten thousand cows.

One day, Lord Mahāvīra arrived in Kampilya. Like others, Kundakaulika also came into the presence of the Lord, listened to the Dharmadeshanā, was impressed, and accepted the Shravaka-Dharma. His life, which was previously filled with worldly desires, now included spirituality. Kundakaulika lived the life of a good religious householder, diligently following the accepted vows.

One day, in the afternoon, he went to the Aśoka grove with a devotional spirit. He took off his ring and upper garment and placed them on a stone slab, and himself became absorbed in meditation. To distract his devotion, a deva appeared there. To divert his attention, the deva picked up the ring and shawl and ascended into the sky. The deva said to Kundakaulika, "Look, the Dharma-principles of Mankhaliputra Goshalak are very beautiful. There is no importance of effort, endeavor, or karma there. Whatever is going to happen is fixed. The religious principles of Lord Mahāvīra are not good. There, effort, endeavor, and endeavor are all accepted, and whatever happens is not fixed according to them. Now you see the difference between the two yourself. According to Goshalak's principles, whatever effort, endeavor, etc. is done is all useless, there is no need to do it. Because in the end, what is going to happen will happen." 

Page #181:
---------------------------
[140]
Hearing this, Kundakaulik said, "Dev! Tell me one thing. This divine power, radiance, brilliance, and wealth that you have attained, did you achieve it through effort and exertion, or without effort and exertion? Did you attain all this without effort and exertion?"
The Dev replied, "Kundakaulik! I attained this without effort and exertion."
Upon this, Kundakaulik said, "Dev! If this is the case, then tell me, why have other beings who do not exert effort and exertion not become Devas like you? If you say that you attained this divine power and wealth through effort and exertion, then how can you call the principles of Goshalak, which do not accept effort and exertion, beautiful? And how can you call the principles of Bhagwan Mahavira, which accept effort and exertion, ugly? Your statement is false."
Hearing Kundakaulik's logical and reasoned statement, the Dev could not find an answer. He was intimidated. He silently placed the ring and scarf on the stone slab and returned with his head down.
By a fortunate coincidence, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Kampilya again during his Janapad-Vihar. As soon as Kundakaulik came to know, he went to pay his respects to Bhagwan. He received his presence, listened to the Dharmadeshana.
Bhagwan Mahavira was omniscient and all-seeing. He knew everything that had happened. He addressed Kundakaulik and told him about the entire incident that had occurred in the Ashoka Vatika and asked him, "Why? Did all this happen?" Kundakaulik said with utmost humility and respect, "Prabhu! You know everything. Exactly as you said, it happened."
Bhagwan was pleased with Kundakaulik's religious faith and knowledge. He praised him, saying, "Kundakaulik! You are blessed, you have done very well."
To inspire the Sadhus and Sadhvis present there, Bhagwan said to them, "Even while living as a householder, how capable a knower of truth Kundakaulik is! He silenced another follower with logic and justice."
Bhagwan expressed hope that Sadhus and Sadhvis who study the twelve Angas are capable of doing this. They should have such ability.
Bhagwan's intention in giving so much importance to Kundakaulik's incident was that every devotee should be firm in their religious principles, and also have knowledge of their principles and the ability to present them before others, so that other followers who engage in religious discussions with them cannot influence them. Rather, they should be silenced by their logical and reasoned analysis. In fact, Bhagwan Mahavira encouraged all devotees to remain active in the knowledge of truth. 

Page #182:
---------------------------
Sixth Study: Kundakaulika]
[This was the inspiration of 141.
Kundakaulika bowed and paid homage to the Lord and returned to his place. Lord Mahavira went on a pilgrimage to other regions. Kundakaulika continued to progress on the path of spiritual practice. Thus fourteen years passed. In the fifteenth year, he entrusted his eldest son with the responsibility of the household and family and devoted himself entirely to spiritual practice. His results became increasingly pure. He worshipped the eleven images of the Shravaka. Finally, he renounced his body in a state of meditation after a month of Sanlekhana and a month of fasting. He was born in the Arunadhwaja Vimana in the form of a deity.
★★ 

Page #183:
---------------------------
Sixth Study
Kundakaulika Shramanopasak Kundakaulika
165. The sixth discourse. Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, in the city of Kampillapur, there was a garden called Sahasrambavana. Jitasatru was the king there. In that city, Kundakaulika, a wealthy merchant, resided. His wife's name was Pūṣā. Six crore gold coins were in his treasury as secure wealth, six crore gold coins were engaged in trade and business, six crore gold coins were engaged in the splendor and wealth of the house, grain, bipeds, quadrupeds, and other resources. He had six cow-herds. Each cow-herd had ten thousand cows.
The Lord Mahavir arrived - a Samvasarana took place. Like Kamadeva, Kundakaulika also accepted the Shravaka Dharma.
The sequence of events, such as giving pure food, water, etc., to the Shramanas, and being engaged in Dharma-worship, is the same as the previous description. Thus, Kundakaulika was engaged in the worship of Dharma.
1. If, Bhante! The Lord Shraman has expounded this meaning of the fifth study of the Upasakadasa with his wealth, then, Bhante! What meaning did he explain for the sixth study?
What is the meaning of the study? 2. See Sutra number 64.
Arya Sudharma asked Jambū - If the Siddha-obtained Lord Mahavir has expounded this meaning of the fifth study of the Upasakadasa, then, Bhante! What meaning did he explain for the sixth study? (Please tell me.) 

Page #184:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Kundakaulik

**Discussion**

[143] Kampilya was an ancient city in India. It is mentioned in the Adi Parva (137.73), Udyoga Parva (189.13, 192.14), and Shanti Parva (139.5) of the Mahabharata. According to the Adi Parva and Udyoga Parva, it was a city in the Dakshin Panchal region at that time. It was the capital of King Drupada. Draupadi's Swayamvara took place here.

The Nayadhammakhao (16th Study) also describes the birth of Draupadi in Kampilya, the capital of King Drupada of the Panchal country.

Currently, it is located as a village called Kampil on the banks of the old Ganga between Badayun and Farrukhabad. It was once a major center of Jainism. The indications found in the Agamas reveal that it was a very prosperous city during the time of Lord Mahavira.

**Meditation in Ashoka Vatika**

166. Then, the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik went to Ashoka Vatika in the afternoon. He reached the place where the earth-stone slab was. He removed his ring and shawl, which were marked with his name. He placed them on the earth-stone slab. After placing them, the Shraman became absorbed in meditation, following the Dharma-Prajnapti-Dharma-Shiksha, as taught by Lord Mahavira.

**The Devotee's Advocacy of Determinism**

167. Then, a Dev appeared before the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik.

168. Then, that Dev took the ring and shawl, marked with Kundakaulik's name, from the earth-stone slab. Holding them, he spoke to Kundakaulik, the Shramanopasaka, in a sweet voice: "O Kundakaulik! Shramanopasaka! The teachings of Gosala, the son of Mankali, are not based on effort, karma, strength, courage, or human endeavor. They are based on determinism, which encompasses all beings. The teachings of Lord Mahavira, however, are based on effort, karma, strength, courage, and human endeavor. They are not based on determinism, which encompasses all beings." 

Page #185:
---------------------------
[144]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
With the jingling of small bells attached to his clothes, he stood in the sky and said to the Shraman Upasak Kundakaulik, "Kundakaulik! Devanupriya! The Dharma-Prajnapti-Dharma-Shiksha of Mankhaliputra Goshalak is beautiful. According to him, there is no place for upward striving, karma, strength, physical power, viriya (internal power), purushkara (pride in manhood), parakrama (pride in heroism), enthusiasm, and vigorous undertaking, all in accordance with the attainment of liberation. All actions that are to be are predetermined. Liberation, (karma, strength, viriya, heroism) parakrama, all these have their own existence, all actions are not predetermined - this Dharma-Prajnapti-Dharma-Prarupana of Bhagwan Mahavira is not beautiful or unseemly."

**Discussion**
Mankhaliputra Goshalak is described in detail in the 15th Shatak of the Bhagavati Sutra. In the Agamottara literature, there are also mentions of events related to him in the necessary Nirukti, etc. In Buddhist literature, he is described in the Majjhimanikaya, Anguttaranikaya, Samyuttanikaya, etc. In the Sumangalavilasi commentary on the Digha Nikaya by Buddhaghosa, there is a detailed discussion of Goshalak's doctrines. Goshalak was one of the six prominent teachers of the Avaidik tradition contemporary to Bhagwan Mahavira. The Bhagavati Sutra mentions that there was a person named Mankhal, belonging to the Mank (Dacoit) caste. His wife's name was Bhadra. Mankhal was a beggar. For this reason, he used to carry a picture in his hand. While wandering for alms with his pregnant wife Bhadra, he once reached a village called Sarvan. As there was no other place, he stayed in the cowshed of a Brahmin named Gobahul to spend the Chaturmas. When the gestation period was complete, Bhadra gave birth to a beautiful and delicate child. Because he was born in Gobahul's cowshed, the child was named Goshal or Goshalak.

Goshalak grew up gradually, became educated and qualified. He also started earning his livelihood independently by begging with a picture in his hand.

Once, Bhagwan Mahavira was spending his Chaturmasik stay in a part of the weavers' workshop in Nalanda outside Rajgriha. By chance, Goshalak also reached there. As there was no other place, he spent the Chaturmas in the same weavers' workshop. While staying there, he was particularly impressed by Bhagwan's unparalleled, extraordinary personality and the divine events that took place from time to time. He wanted to be initiated by Bhagwan. Bhagwan did not agree to initiate him. When he continued his efforts and persisted, Bhagwan accepted him as a disciple. He stayed with Bhagwan for six years. He received immense Tejo-leshya from him, then he separated from Bhagwan. He started calling himself Arhat, Tirthankara, Jin, and Kevali.

Later, an incident occurred, out of hatred and jealousy, he threw Tejo-leshya on Bhagwan. Being completely non-violent, Bhagwan tolerated him with equanimity. Tejo-leshya... 

Page #186:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Kundakaulik

[145] The Lord Mahavira could not be defeated. She returned and entered the body of Gosala. Gosala, afflicted with bilious fever and intense burning, died after seven days.
This is a very brief summary of the account in Bhagavati.
The incident of Kundakaulik in this context occurred when Gosala was separate from Lord Mahavira and was wandering the country, proclaiming himself as Arhat, Jin, and Kevali. Kundakaulik's question:

169. Then the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik said to the Deva: "Deva! If the Dharma-pannatti of Gosala, the son of Mankali, is not based on Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), but on Niyaya (determinism), all beings are destined, then the Dharma-pannatti of the Bhagavan Mahavira, the Shraman, is based on Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), and all beings are not destined. Deva! How did you obtain, acquire, and become self-possessed of such divine powers, divine radiance, and divine influence? Did you obtain them through Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), or through Anuththana (non-effort, non-karma, non-strength, non-vigor, non-heroism, or non-prowess)? In other words, did you obtain them without using karma, strength, etc.?"

The Deva's answer:

170. Then the Deva said to the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik: "Devanupriya! I have obtained, acquired, and become self-possessed of such divine powers, divine radiance, and divine influence without Uththana (effort, karma, strength, vigor, heroism, and prowess), or through Anuththana (non-effort, non-karma, non-strength, non-vigor, non-heroism, or non-prowess)."

Kundakaulik's response:

1. See Sutra number 168.
2. See Sutra number 169. 

Page #187:
---------------------------
[146]
The Shramanopasaka Kundakolika said to the Deva, "Deva! If you have obtained these divine powers without effort, striving, or exertion, then why are those beings who have no effort, striving, or exertion not Devas? Deva! If you have obtained these divine powers through effort, striving, and exertion, then your statement that "the teachings of Gosala Mankhaliputta are not beautiful because they do not accept effort, striving, and exertion, while the teachings of the Bhagavan Mahavira are beautiful because they accept effort, striving, and exertion, and all things are determined by them" is false."

[172] When the Deva heard this from the Shramanopasaka Kundakolika, he became filled with doubt, (desire and uncertainty), and was overcome with shame. He could not answer Kundakolika. He placed the named ring and scarf back on the stone slab and returned in the direction from which he had come.

[173] At that time, the Bhagavan Mahavira arrived in Kampilya.

[174] The Shramanopasaka Kundakolika, having been praised in this way, became firm and resolute, like Kamadeva, and went forth to live in the forest. 

Page #188:
---------------------------
## Sixth Study: Kundakaulik

[147] When the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulik heard all this, he was extremely delighted and went to see the Bhagavan like Kamadeva, worshipped the Bhagavan, and listened to the Dharma-Deshana.

[175] 'Kundakoliya!' The Bhagavan Mahavira said to the Shramanopasaka Kundakoliya, 'Kundakoliya! Indeed, Kundakoliya! In the past, during the time of the previous Kalpa, a Deva appeared before you in the Ashoka Vatika. He took your named ring and shawl and went up into the sky. Then the Bhagavan explained what happened next. (When that Deva could not give you any answer, he returned your named ring and shawl and went back in the same direction from which he had come.)

Kundakoliya! Is this correct?' Kundakoliya said, 'Bhagavan! It happened exactly like that.' Then the Bhagavan said to him, just as he had said to Kamadeva, 'Kundakoliya! You are blessed.'

The Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira addressed the assembled Shramans and Shramanis, saying, 'Aryas! If householders who live in the world also refute other followers with meaning, reason, questions, logic, and answers, then Aryas! Shramans who are Nirgrantha, who study the twelve-fold Ganipitaka - the twelve limbs of conduct, etc. - are certainly capable of refuting other followers with meaning, (reason, questions, logic, and analysis).

[176] Then the Shramans and Shramanis, with humility, accepted this statement of the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, saying, 'It is so, Bhagavan!'

[177] Then the Shramanopasaka Kundakoliya bowed and prostrated before the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira. After bowing and prostrating, he asked questions, and after asking questions, he attained enlightenment. After attaining enlightenment, he went in the same direction from which he had come. 

Page #189:
---------------------------
[148]
The Shramanopasaka Kundakaulika bowed and paid homage to the Shraman Bhagavan, asked questions, received answers, and returned in the same direction from which he had come.
[178]
The Bhagavan Mahavira went to other Janapadas. Peaceful death.
[179]
Then, for fourteen years, the Shramanopasaka Kundakaulika, who was very devoted to the vows, lived in seclusion. When the fifteenth year was half over, one night at midnight, a thought arose in his mind, just as it had arisen in the mind of Kamadeva. In the same way, he appointed his eldest son in his place and, in accordance with the Dharma-Prajnapti, he went to the Poshadshala to live in devotion near Bhagavan Mahavira. He worshipped eleven Upasaka-Pratimas. The rest of the story is also like that of Kamadeva. In the end, he gave up his body and was born in the Arunadhwaja Vimana in the form of a deva. (Bhagavan! Where will Kundakaulika go from that Devaloka when his lifespan, existence, and position are exhausted? Where will he be born? Gautama! He will become a Siddha, Buddha, and Mukta in the Mahavideha region. He will end (all suffering).
||Nikkhevo|| ||The sixth chapter of the seventh Anga, Upasaka-Dasha, is complete||
1. See Sutra-number 122. 2. See Sutra-number 149. 3. See Sutra-number 92. 4. And thus, Jambu! This is the meaning of the sixth chapter of the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Shraman, which I have told you.
Conclusion-Arya Sudharma said-Jambu! This is the meaning of the sixth chapter of the Upasaka-Dasha, as explained by the Siddha-obtained Bhagavan Mahavira, which I have told you. 

Page #190:
---------------------------
## Seventh Study Summary

The time of Lord Mahavira was filled with various religious beliefs, diverse sects, and numerous rituals. In North India, there were many teachers of non-Vedic ideologies who traveled around spreading their doctrines. Many of them claimed to be Arhat, Jina, Kevali, or Sarvagna. The Suttanipata Sabhiyasutta mentions 63 such sects. The second Anga of the Jain scriptures, the Sutra Kritanga Agama, describes four categories of contemporary thinkers of Lord Mahavira: Kiyaavadi, Akriyaavadi, Vinayaavadi, and Agnanaavadi. It is said that they discussed their Samvasarana-siddhant or doctrine in different ways. The Sutra Kritanga Vritti mentions 363 religious beliefs. These various thinkers were mostly divided into these four doctrines.

Buddhist literature mainly mentions six Shraman sects, whose leaders or heads are mentioned as follows:

Their doctrinal beliefs are described as Akriyaavaad, Niyativaad, Ucchedavaad, Anyonyavaad, Chaturyamasanvaravaad, and Vikshepavaad. Buddhist literature uses the term 'Niganthanatputta' for Lord Mahavira.

Mankhaliputra Goshalak is described in detail in both Jain and Buddhist literature as a Niyativadi. The fifth Anga, Vyākhyāprajñapti Sutra, describes Goshalak in detail in the 15th century.

Goshalak had some knowledge of Ashtaang Nimitta. He could give correct answers to people about profit, loss, happiness, sorrow, life, and death. Therefore, whoever came to him, he would tell them such things. People wanted miracles.

Thus, he had thousands of followers who were impressed by him. Sakdalaputra, a potter from Polaspur, was one of Goshalak's prominent followers.

Sakdalaputra was a wealthy and prosperous householder. He had one crore gold coins in his treasury as secure wealth, one crore gold coins invested in business, and one crore gold coins invested in his home's splendor and equipment. He had a herd of ten thousand cows.

1.  "Chattari samosaranani mani, paavadu ya jaim puḍho vayanti. Kiriyam akiriyam viniyam ti taiyam annaanamaahansu chautthameva."
    Sutra Kritanga 1.12.1

Page #191:
---------------------------
## The Story of Sakdalputra

Sakdalputra's primary occupation was making and selling earthenware. He had five hundred workshops outside the city of Polaspur, where many paid workers toiled. Every morning, they would arrive and begin crafting various sizes and types of pots. The sale of these pots was handled through a separate system. Sakdalputra employed many individuals who would sell the pots in the city's marketplaces, crossroads, fields, and public spaces.

Sakdalputra's wife was named Agnimitra. She was skilled in household duties and a partner in her husband's joys and sorrows.

Sakdalputra was deeply devoted to his religious principles and dedicated time to worship. [It was an era where individuals lived according to their beliefs, and faith was not merely a matter of words.]

One day, Sakdalputra went to his Ashoka garden in the afternoon and engaged in religious devotion according to his beliefs. Shortly after, a celestial being appeared. The celestial being, residing in the sky, addressed Sakdalputra, saying, "Tomorrow morning, the Mahamahan, the holder of unhindered knowledge and vision, the revered one of the three worlds, the Arhat, the Jina, the Kevali, the omniscient, the all-seeing, will arrive here. You should offer him your homage and worship, and invite him for a place, a mat, a cushion, etc." The celestial being departed. Sakdalputra thought, "The celestial being has given me excellent news. My religious teacher, Mankhaliputra Goshalak, will arrive here tomorrow. He is the Jina, the Arhat, and the Kevali, so I will definitely offer him my homage and worship. I will invite him for things he might need."

The next morning, Lord Mahavira arrived. He stayed in the Sahasramravan garden. Many devotees went to see him. Sakdalputra, thinking that his teacher Goshalak had arrived, also went to see him.

Lord Mahavira delivered his sermon. Sakdalputra, along with others, listened. Lord Mahavira knew that Sakdalputra was easily enlightened. He should be inspired by the true Dharma. Therefore, he addressed him, saying, "Yesterday afternoon, the celestial being who informed you about the arrival in the Ashoka garden was not referring to Goshalak." Sakdalputra was impressed by Lord Mahavira's direct knowledge and his mind was filled with joy. He stood up, offered proper homage to Lord Mahavira, and requested him to visit his workshops and accept the necessary materials. Lord Mahavira accepted his request and went there.

Sakdalputra was impressed by Lord Mahavira's personality and his extrasensory knowledge, but Lord Mahavira knew that his theoretical faith lay with Mankhaliputra Goshalak. Lord Mahavira wanted to guide him at the right moment. One day, Sakdalputra was having the pots kept inside his workshop for ventilation, brought out to be placed in the sun. Lord Mahavira saw this as an opportunity... 

Page #192:
---------------------------
## Seventh Study: Summary: In Brief

[151] It seemed agreeable. They asked him, "How were these pots made?" Sakdalputra said, "O Bhagavan! First, the clay was collected, soaked, mixed with ash and cow dung, kneaded, and all was combined. Then it was placed on the potter's wheel and different types of pots were made."

Bhagavan Mahavira said, "Sakdalputra! Tell me one thing. Were these pots made by effort, human endeavor, and exertion, or by non-effort, non-human endeavor, and non-exertion?"

Sakdalputra said, "O Bhagavan! By non-effort, non-human endeavor, and non-exertion. Because effort, human endeavor, and exertion have no significance. Whatever happens is predetermined."

Bhagavan Mahavira said, "Sakdalputra! Imagine someone steals your dry, wind-blown pots, scatters them, breaks them, or commits violence against your wife Agni Mitra. What punishment would you give him?"

Sakdalputra said, "O Bhagavan! I would scold him, beat him severely, and what's more, I would kill him."

Bhagavan Mahavira said, "Sakdalputra! Why so? You do not believe in effort and human endeavor. You consider all actions as predetermined. Then what is the role of the person who does such a thing? It is predetermined. How can you consider him guilty? If you say that he does it intentionally, then your principle of not believing in effort and human endeavor, and considering everything as predetermined, is wrong, false."

Sakdalputra was an intelligent and wise man. From this short conversation, the true essence was understood by him. He attained enlightenment. His head bowed in reverence at the feet of Bhagavan Mahavira. As the wise men of that time did, he accepted the twelve types of Shravak Dharma from Bhagavan Mahavira. Inspired by him, his wife Agni Mitra also did the same. Thus, the husband and wife attained Sadbhav and started utilizing their time in religious devotion along with their household life.

Sakdalputra was the chief Shravak of Mankhaliputra Goshalak. When Goshalak heard this, he did not like it due to sectarian attachment. He thought to himself, "I should convince Sakdalputra again and bring him back to my path." For this purpose, he came to Polaspur. He stayed at the Ajivika's shelter. He kept his utensils, equipment, etc., there and went to Sakdalputra's place with some of his disciples. Sakdalputra had already attained the true essence and the true Guru, so he did not show the same reverence, respect, and honor that he used to show when Goshalak came. He sat silently. Goshalak was very cunning, he understood immediately. He devised a strategy. To please Sakdalputra, he praised Bhagavan Mahavira profusely. Sakdalputra could not understand this cunning behavior of Goshalak. Goshalak's intention was that if I get another opportunity to have a religious conversation with Sakdalputra, I will change his mind. Sakdalputra, towards Bhagavan Mahavira... 

Page #193:
---------------------------
[152]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
Due to the respect shown by Goshalak, he politely requested, "Please stay in my workshop, take the necessary items." Goshalak only wanted this. He readily agreed and went there. During his stay there, he had many opportunities to engage in philosophical discussions with Sakdalputra. He tried very hard to change Sakdalputra, but he was completely unsuccessful. Sakdalputra had already attained the true principles with great wisdom and understanding, how could he be swayed? Disheartened, Goshalak left from there. Sakdalputra continued to engage in religious devotion along with fulfilling his worldly responsibilities as before.
Thus, fourteen years passed. The fifteenth year was half over. One night, in the middle of the night, Sakdalputra was engaged in his religious worship. A false deity came to him to make him break his vow, threatening to kill his sons if he did not give up his vow. Sakdalputra remained steadfast, then he killed his three sons one after the other in front of him, cutting each into nine pieces of flesh, boiled them in a cauldron filled with boiling water, and splattered their flesh and blood on his body. But Sakdalputra endured it all with self-strength and patience, his faith did not waver.
Still, the deity was not discouraged. He thought that Agni Mitra was of great importance in Sakdalputra's life, she was not only a devoted wife, but also a companion in happiness and sorrow, and most importantly, she was the sole helper of his religious life. Thinking this, he threatened to kill Sakdalputra's wife Agni Mitra in front of him and inflict the same fate on her. Sakdalputra, who remained unmoved even after seeing the murder of his three sons before his own eyes, was disturbed by this threat. Anger arose in him and he thought, I must catch this wicked one. He immediately got up to catch him, but who can catch whom in a divine conspiracy? The deity disappeared. The pillar in front of Sakdalputra's hands came. Seeing all these unnatural events, Sakdalputra was frightened and made a loud noise. When Agni Mitra heard this, she immediately came there, listened to her husband's entire story and said, "You have lost in the final test. That false-sighted deity has finally succeeded in breaking your vow. Do penance for this mistake." Sakdalputra did the same.
Sakdalputra's final life was also very prosperous. He attained samadhi-death with a month-long final sanlekhana and fasting. After giving up his body, he became a four-pal-upamasthitika deva in the Arunabhoot Vimana. 

Page #194:
---------------------------
## Seventh Study
## Sakdalputra, the Ajivika

**180.** This is the beginning of the seventh study, introduced with an opening statement. The noble Sudharma said: There was a city named Polasapura. There was a garden named Sahasramravan. Jitasatru was the king there.

**181.** In that city of Polasapura, there lived a potter named Sakdalputra, who was a follower of the Ajivika doctrine or the Gosala school of thought. He had attained the true essence of the Ajivika doctrine through listening to the teachings, accepting them, questioning them, firmly grasping them, and making them his own. He was filled with love and devotion for his religion, right down to his bones and marrow. He firmly believed that the Ajivika doctrine was the only means to achieve the purpose of life, the ultimate truth. Everything else was meaningless and useless. Thus, he lived according to the Ajivika doctrine, nurturing his soul.

**Discussion**

In this sutra, the descriptions of Sakdalputra as having attained the teachings, accepted them, questioned them, firmly grasped them, and made them his own, are all qualities that are mentioned in the sixth study of the Upasakadasa.

**2.** The noble Sudharma asked Jambudvipa: If the enlightened Lord Mahavira has explained the meaning of the sixth study of the Upasakadasa in this way, then what meaning did he explain for the seventh study? (Please tell me.) 

Page #195:
---------------------------
[154]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
This passage describes a Jain follower named Sakdalputra, who was deeply devoted to his faith. He had thoroughly studied its principles and sought to understand its essence through inquiry and questioning. He believed in the truth and reality of the Ajivika philosophy, as evidenced by his unwavering faith, which is described as being "bone-marrow-love-desire-blood-special." This suggests that people in those times were deeply engaged in both their worldly pursuits and their spiritual and philosophical understanding. 

**Wealth and Business**

182. Sakdalputra, the Ajivika follower, had one crore gold coins stored as reserve wealth, one crore gold coins invested in business, and one crore gold coins used for household luxuries. He also owned a herd of ten thousand cows.

183. Sakdalputra, the Ajivika follower, had a wife named Agnimitra.

184. Sakdalputra, the Ajivika follower, had five hundred potter's workshops outside the city of Polaspur. Many men worked there, receiving food and wages. They would start their day making various pottery items like karakas (small pots), varakas (large pots), pitharas (large earthenware vessels), ghadas (water pots), ardhaghadas (half-pots), kalasas (large water pots), alijjaras (large water jars), jambulas (wine jars), and uttriyas (large-bellied vessels with long necks used for storing oil, ghee, etc.). Other men would also work for food and wages, selling these pottery items on the road.

**Discussion**

The mention of Sakdalputra's workshops being located outside the city suggests that... 

Page #196:
---------------------------
## Chapter 7: Sakdalputra

It is revealed that the potters' workshops and kilns were located outside the cities to avoid air pollution from the smoke and inconvenience to the city dwellers. Sakdalputra had five hundred workshops, and a lot of smoke was generated during the baking of the pots, so all the construction work was done outside the city. The selling was done on the roads and crossroads. Even today, it is mostly the same. The potters' houses are on the outskirts of cities and villages, where they make and bake their pots. The selling of pots is still seen on the roads and crossroads.

**Information by the Dev**

185. Then, the ascetic Sakdalputra, for his livelihood, went to the Asoka garden in the early morning, just as the merchants did, and after arriving, he stayed there, having accepted the Dharma-Prajnapti - Dharma-teaching, near Mankaliputra Gosala.

186. Then, a Dev appeared before the ascetic Sakdalputra, who was engaged in his livelihood.

187. That Dev, adorned with small bells and wearing five-colored fine clothes, standing in the sky, spoke to the ascetic Sakdalputra, saying: "O Dev-anupriya! Tomorrow morning, here, the great Mahamahan - the great non-violent, the possessor of unhindered knowledge and vision, the knower of the past, present, and future, the Arhat - the most worthy of worship, the most powerful, the Jin - the conqueror of passion and hatred, the Kevali - the perfect, the pure and infinite knowledge, etc., the omniscient, the all-seeing, the three worlds are eagerly waiting to see him, they desire his service and worship, the Dev, the human, and the Asura - all are worthy of worship, worthy of praise, worthy of bowing down, (worthy of respect, worthy of honor, auspicious, prosperous, divine, worthy of praise) worthy of being served, and he has attained the perfection of his karma. You should bow down to him, (pay homage to him, respect him, honor him, auspicious, prosperous, divine, worthy of praise) serve him, invite him with offerings, food, fruits, and flowers." He said this and then disappeared in the same direction from which he had appeared. 

Page #197:
---------------------------
[156]
The worthy, auspicious, benevolent, divine, radiant, and powerful, embodiment of knowledge, worthy of worship, will arrive with the wealth of true actions, good deeds, and good fortune. Therefore, you should pay homage to them (offer salutations, respect, and honor). They are auspicious, benevolent, divine, and embodiments of knowledge. You should worship them. Invite them with offerings (things that ascetics use and return), a seat, a cushion, a bed, and bedding. Thus, they returned in the same direction from which they had appeared, after being invited a second and third time. 

**Discussion**
In the commentary on this sutra, Acharya Abhaydeva Suri explains the word "mahamahan" as follows: A person who resolves, "I will not kill anyone," who refrains from harming all living beings, both subtle and gross, through mind, speech, and body, and who advises others not to harm anyone, is called a "mahan." Such a person is great, therefore he is a "mahamahan," meaning a great non-violent being.

In other scriptures as well, wherever the word "mahamahan" appears, it is explained in the same way. There is another interpretation of this word. In Prakrit, the word "brahman" is also used as "bamhan" and "bambhan" along with "mahan." According to this, the meaning of "mahamahan" is a great Brahman. The word "brahman" holds great significance in Indian literature from the perspective of virtue and excellence. The concept of a Brahman is that of a person who embodies the virtues of purity, sattva, good conduct, forbearance, austerity, and other virtues. Literally, its meaning is a knower. In grammar, its derivation is established by the addition of the suffix "an" to the root "vid" in the chapter on "kridanta." According to this, its etymology is: one who knows or studies Brahma-veda or pure consciousness is a Brahman. From a qualitative perspective, the Veda, which is derived from the root "vid," is a symbol of excellent knowledge. Thus, a Brahman is presented as a person of high knowledge and character.

We set aside the caste system based on birth, for it was a social order. In fact, this high and noble meaning of the word "brahman" is accepted not only in Vedic literature but also in Jain literature. There is an incident in the Uttaradhyayanasutra:

Jayghosh Muni, born in a Brahman family, once came to Varanasi during his travels. He stayed in a beautiful garden called Manorama outside the city. At that time, a Vedic scholar named Vijayghosh was performing a yajna. Jayghosh Muni went to Vijayghosh's house for alms to break his one-month fast. Vijayghosh said, "The food prepared here is for Brahmans." To this, Jayghosh Muni said, "Vijayghosh! You do not know the true nature of Brahmanhood. Listen, I will tell you who a Brahman is: 1. "Karmany an." Panini's Ashtadhyayi. 3. 2. 1. 2. "Brahma-vedam, shuddham chaitanyam va vetti adhite va iti brahmanah." 

Page #198:
---------------------------
[157
Seventh Study: Sakadalputra]
We call one a Brahmin who is not attached to his own people, family members, etc., who does not think too much about becoming a renunciant, and who delights in the excellent, Dharma-filled words of the Aryas. Just as gold that has been heated in fire is pure and clear, so too, in our view, is one who is free from attachment, aversion, and fear a Brahmin.
One who is a conqueror of the senses, engaged in austerity, who has become thin as a result, whose body has little blood and flesh due to intense practice, who is mounted on the attainment of Nirvana through excellent vows, is truly a Brahmin.
One who, knowing with subtlety the beings that move and those that are stationary, does not harm them through the three yogas - mind, speech, and body, is a Brahmin.
One who does not speak falsely out of anger, laughter, greed, and fear, we call a Brahmin.
One who does not take anything, whether animate or inanimate, small or large, without it being given, is a Brahmin. One who does not indulge in sexual intercourse with gods, humans, or animals through mind, speech, and body, is truly a Brahmin.
Just as the lotus, though born in water, is not attached to it, so too, one who is not attached to sensual pleasures is a Brahmin.
One who is not greedy, who lives on alms, who has renounced the home and possessions, who does not have attachment to householders, is a Brahmin.
One who, abandoning the previous association with caste members and relatives, adopts a life of renunciation, and does not return to be attached to pleasures, is a Brahmin in our view.
The word-picture of the personality of a Brahmin presented here makes it clear that, in the words of Jayaghoṣa Muni, a great renunciant, constantly moving on the path of spiritual practice, a practitioner who flawlessly observes the vows, is truly a Brahmin.
The last section or chapter of the Buddhist Dhammapada is the Brahmana-vagga, which describes the nature, qualities, and character of a Brahmin. It is said there:
"
'One whose eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind are not attached to the infinite forms of sound, smell, taste, touch, and the endless 'I' and 'mine', that is, one who is raised above desires and pleasures, fearless, unattached, is a Brahmin.
It is not less meritorious for a Brahmin to turn his mind away from pleasant pleasures. Where the mind is freed from violence, there sorrow itself is pacified.
1. Uttaraadhyayanasutra 25. 20-29.

Page #199:
---------------------------
[158]
I call a person a Brahmin who is free from evil deeds, both in thought, word, and action, and who is restrained and disciplined in all three.
I call a person a Brahmin who wears tattered clothes, is thin, has veins protruding from their body due to severe austerities, and lives alone in the forest, absorbed in meditation.
I call a person a Brahmin who has severed all attachments and bonds, who is free from fear, and who is beyond attachment and possessiveness.
I call a person a Brahmin who endures anger, insults, killing, and imprisonment without any disturbance to their mind, and whose strength lies in forgiveness.
I call a person a Brahmin who is free from anger, virtuous, well-versed in scriptures, disciplined, and has a final body, meaning they are destined for liberation after death.
I call a person a Brahmin who is not attached to pleasures, like water on a lotus leaf or a mustard seed on the tip of a saw.
I call a person a Brahmin who is wise, intelligent, and knows the path and the wrong path, and who has attained the highest truth.
I call a person a Brahmin who is free from violence towards all beings, both mobile and immobile, and who neither kills nor encourages killing.

Comparing the present discussion of Uttaraadhyayanasutra and Dhammapada, it appears that both texts share a similar perspective on the analysis of the virtuous, knowledgeable, and ethical personality of a Brahmin.

We find numerous references to the characteristics of a virtuous Brahmin in Vedic literature. The Shantiparva of the Mahabharata discusses this in various contexts.

In one instance, a scholar of Brahmins describes the characteristics of a Brahmin, stating:
A Brahmin should not desire the pleasures of smell, taste, objects, or ornaments. They should not seek honor, fame, or glory. This is the conduct of a true Brahmin.

One who considers all beings as their own family, who knows the truth that is worth knowing, and who is free from desires, such a Brahmin never dies, meaning they are free from the cycle of birth and death.

When one does not harbor any negative emotions towards any being through their mind, speech, or actions, only then does one attain the state of Brahman or Brahminhood.

Desire is the only bondage in this world, there is no other. One who is free from the bondage of desire... 
1. Dhammapada Brahminvaggo 3, 8, 9, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23. 

Page #200:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra]
[159 is freed, he is able to attain Brahma-bhava Brahmanhood.
By which a man becomes satiated without food, by which a poor man also experiences complete satisfaction, where a man experiences unlimited power without consuming ghee etc. nourishing substances, he who attains such Brahma-bhava, he is the Veda-knowing Brahman.
Those who transgress actions - free from actions, devoid of worldly desires, having attained the qualities of the self, Brahmanas are not troubled by old age and death.'5
Similarly, in the 62nd chapter of this same Parva, in the 73rd chapter and in many other places, Brahmanhood has been discussed. If we go into the depth of the present discussion, it will be clear that the voice of the Mahabharata author Vyasa is no different from the Uttaraadhyayana and the Dhammapada.
   Manu, the regulator of the Indian social system, has mentioned the Brahman as a very virtuous man and has inspired his character to learn from him.
Looking at these discussions, it can be understood that the basis of the ancient Indian Varna system was Guna, Karma, not lineage as it is today. The imagination of Sakdalputra
188. Therefore, when the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra heard this from the Deva, he thought in this way, he had a desire, thought and resolve - "My Dharma-acharya, Dharma-upadeshaka, Mahamahan, unparalleled holder of knowledge-vision, (knower of the past, present and future - all three times, Arhat, Jin, Kevali, Sarvagna, Sarvadarshi, all three lokas are very eager to see him, they are eager to serve and worship him, Deva, Manushya and Asura - all are worthy of worship, praise, respect, honour, auspicious, auspicious, divine, knowledge, worthy of worship,) Sakarma-sampatti-yukt Mankhaliputra Gosala will come here. Then I will worship him, (I will honour and respect him. He is auspicious, auspicious, divine and 1. Mahabharata Shantiparva 251. 1, 3, 6, 7, 18, 22. 2. Manusmriti 2, 20 3. See Sutra-number 187 

Page #201:
---------------------------
[160] I will perform Paryupasana and invite the Pratiharika (seat, platform, supporter) for this purpose. The presence of Bhagwan Mahavira 
189. So, it is said that while the ascetics were burning with devotion, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived. The assembly gathered and performed Paryupasana of Bhagwan.
190. Then, the Upasaka Sadalputtra heard this news. He thought, "Thus, Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic, is staying in the city of Polaspur, in the Sahasrambavana garden, where he is dwelling, having attained the state of Ahapaddhiruvam, having conquered the senses, practicing restraint, and cultivating his own being. I will go to him, I will pay my respects to Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic (I will bow, I will honor, I will respect, I will wish him well, I will wish him prosperity, I will wish him divine qualities, I will wish him knowledge). I will perform Paryupasana." Thinking thus, he bathed (performed daily rituals, performed auspicious rituals to ward off evil dreams and other negative influences), wore pure, appropriate (auspicious and excellent) clothes, adorned his body with a few precious ornaments, and accompanied by many people, he left his house. After leaving his house, he went to the center of the city of Polaspur. After reaching the city, he went to the Sahasrambavana garden, where Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic, was staying. After reaching there, he performed the Tikkhutto Ayahin, the Payahin (rituals of approaching and bowing). After performing these rituals, he bowed and paid his respects. After bowing and paying his respects (he stood not too close, not too far, facing Bhagwan, with folded hands, listening attentively, with humility), he performed Paryupasana.
191. Then, Bhagwan Mahavira, the ascetic, saw the Upasaka Sadalputtra. 1. See Sutra number 66 2. See Sutra number 93 3. See Sutra number 11 

Page #202:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra]
[161. The Dharma-katha is complete.
Then the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira gave a Dharma-deshna to the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra and the vast assembly.
192. Sakdalputra! This Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira said to the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra: - "Surely, Sakdalputra! When you were wandering in the Ashoka-vanika in the afternoon, a deva appeared before you. Then that deva, who was in the sky, said to you: - "Tomorrow morning, the Arhat, the Kevali will come."
Bhagwan told Sakdalputra the whole story, from his bowing and prostrating, to his determination to perform Paryupasana. Then he asked him: - "Sakdalputra! Did this happen?" Sakdalputra said: - "It did happen." Then Bhagwan said: - "Sakdalputra! That deva did not say this to Mankhaliputra Gosala."
Effect on Sakdal
_ 193. Then, when the Ajivika-upasaka Sakdalputra was told this by the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, he thought in this way: - "This Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Mahamahan, the possessor of born knowledge and vision, and the one who has attained the perfection of all good deeds. I will bow to this Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, prostrate to him, and offer him hospitality, food, and drink (and prepare a comfortable seat for him).
1. See Sutra-number 11 2. See Sutra-number 185 3. See Sutra-number 188 4. See Sutra-number 188

Page #203:
---------------------------
##  Upasakadasangasutra 162

[Upasakadasangasutra]

**162**
He was endowed with wealth. Therefore, it was auspicious for me to invite the Venerable Lord Mahavira by offering prostrations and salutations, and to provide him with a suitable seat, a platform (bed and bedding). Thinking thus, he got up, offered prostrations and salutations to the Venerable Lord Mahavira, and said, "O Bhagavan! Outside the city of Polasapur, I have five hundred potter's workshops. Please grace them with your presence by accepting a suitable seat, a platform (bed), and bedding."

**194**
The Venerable Lord Mahavira, having heard the request of the lay follower, Sakdalaputra, accepted it and stayed in his five hundred potter's workshops, accepting a pure, suitable seat, a platform (bed), and bedding.

**195**
One day, the lay follower, Sakdalaputra, brought out earthenware vessels from inside the workshop, which were drying in the wind, and placed them in the sun.

**196**
The Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay follower, Sakdalaputra, "Sakdalaputra! How are these earthenware vessels made?"

**197**
The lay follower, Sakdalaputra, replied to the Venerable Lord Mahavira, "O Bhagavan! First, the clay is mixed with water, then it is mixed with ash and cow dung. After mixing, it is placed on the potter's wheel, and then many pots (bowls, plates, or jars, half-pots, pitchers, large pots, water-pots), and wells are made."

1. "Kahan Kato?" Angasutta, p. 405
2. See Sutra 184 

Page #204:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra

[163 198. Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! Are these earthen pots made by effort, exertion, and endeavor, or are they made without effort, exertion, and endeavor?"
Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! Are these earthen pots made by effort, exertion, and endeavor, or are they made without effort, exertion, and endeavor?"
199. Then the lay follower Sakdalputra replied to the Venerable Lord Mahavira, "Venerable Sir! They are made without effort, exertion, and endeavor. There is no existence or place for effort, exertion, and endeavor. All beings are governed by destiny."
Then the lay follower Sakdalputra replied to the Venerable Lord Mahavira, "Venerable Sir! They are made without effort, exertion, and endeavor. There is no existence or place for effort, exertion, and endeavor. All beings are governed by destiny."
200. Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! If someone were to steal, destroy, break, or damage an earthen pot, or if someone were to enjoy sensual pleasures with a woman, what punishment would you give to that person?"
Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira asked the lay follower Sakdalputra, "Sakdalputra! If someone were to steal, destroy, break, or damage an earthen pot, or if someone were to enjoy sensual pleasures with a woman, what punishment would you give to that person?"
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person."
"Sakdalputra! You would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. You would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Sakdalputra! You would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. You would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture, abandon, beat, or torture that person. I would not prematurely end the life of that person. If there is no effort, exertion, and endeavor, then all beings are governed by destiny."
"Venerable Sir! I would not punish, kill, bind, torture,
Page #205:
---------------------------
[164]
(If a man steals your sun-dried or wind-dried earthenware pots, or scatters them, or pierces them, or breaks them, or carries them away, or if he enjoys abundant pleasures with your wife Agni Mitra, what punishment would you give him?)
The Upasaka Sakdalaputra said, "O Bhagavan, I would scold him, or beat him, or bind him, or trample him, or threaten him, or kill him untimely."
The Bhagavan Mahavira said, "O Sakdalaputra, if there is no effort, no human endeavor, and all actions are predetermined, then no man would steal your sun-dried or wind-dried earthenware pots, (or scatter them, or pierce them, or break them), or carry them away, and no man would enjoy abundant pleasures with your wife Agni Mitra, and you would not scold him, or beat him, (or bind him, or trample him, or threaten him, or slap him, or take away his wealth, or denounce him with harsh words), or kill him untimely (because all this that happened was predetermined).
If you believe that a man actually steals your sun-dried or wind-dried earthenware pots (or scatters them, or pierces them, or breaks them, or) carries them away, or enjoys abundant pleasures with your wife Agni Mitra, and you scold him (or beat him, or bind him, or trample him, or threaten him, or slap him, or take away his wealth, or denounce him with harsh words) or kill him untimely, then what you say about the absence of effort, human endeavor, and the predetermination of all actions is false." Bodhilabha
201. Thus, the Upasaka Sakdalaputra attained enlightenment. 202. Then, the Upasaka Sakdalaputra bowed and prostrated before the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira,
1. See Sutra number 169. 

Page #206:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra

[165] Sakdalputra bowed and prostrated before the Venerable Lord Mahavira and said, "O Bhagavan! I wish to hear the Dharma from you."

[203] Then the Venerable Lord Mahavira preached the Dharma to Sakdalputra, the seeker of livelihood, and the assembly present. Sakdalputra and Agnimitra accept the vows.

[204] Then, after hearing the Dharma from the Venerable Lord Mahavira, Sakdalputra, the seeker of livelihood, became extremely happy and satisfied. His heart was filled with joy, and he accepted the lay-Dharma. The only difference between his joy and that of others was that Sakdalputra had one crore gold coins in his treasury as secure wealth, one crore gold coins invested in business, and one crore gold coins invested in the splendor, resources, and materials of his home. He had a cattle farm with ten thousand cows.

Sakdalputra bowed and prostrated before the Venerable Lord Mahavira. After bowing and prostrating, he left from there, passed through the middle of the city of Polaspur, and went to his home to his wife Agnimitra. He said to her, "O Devanupriya! The Venerable Lord Mahavira has arrived. You go and pay your respects to him, perform paryupaasana, 

Page #207:
---------------------------
[166]
Accept the twelve types of Shravak-Dharma from them, which are the five Anuvratas and the seven Shikshavrata.
[205]
Then, Agni Mitra, the wife of the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, accepted her husband's statement with humility, saying, "You are right."
[206]
Then, the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra called his servants and said, "Devānupriyās! Prepare a chariot, a superior vehicle for religious purposes, which is swift-moving, has uniform hooves, tails, and horns painted in various colors, adorned with golden ornaments and yokes, with silver bells hanging from its neck, and a thin thread tied to its nose with a fine gold wire, held by carriers with a rope made of silk, adorned with blue lotus flowers, drawn by two young bulls, decorated with various gems and many golden bells, made of fine wood, perfectly straight, excellent, and beautiful, with superior characteristics. Prepare it quickly and inform me."
[207]
Then, the servants, upon hearing the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra's words, (being extremely delighted, experiencing joy and pleasure in their minds, with extremely gentle mental states, and hearts overflowing with joy, folded their hands, circled their heads, and bowed their heads, addressing Sakdalputra with the respectful word "Swami," and accepting his statement with humility, listened to his words. Hearing this, they quickly presented the superior vehicle drawn by swift-moving bulls.)
[208]
Then, Agni Mitra, his wife, bathed, (performed the rituals of Kayabalika, Kayakouya, 

Page #208:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakadalputra]
- [167 Mangal-) Having bathed (performed daily and occasional duties, adorned the body, performed auspicious rituals to ward off bad dreams and other defects), wearing pure, assembly-worthy (auspicious, excellent) clothes, adorned the body with a few precious ornaments, surrounded by a group of maids, she mounted a religious, excellent chariot, having mounted, she passed through the middle of the city of Polaspur, having passed, she reached the Sahasramravan garden, having reached, she descended from the religious, excellent chariot, surrounded by a group of maids, she went to where the Lord Mahavira was seated, having gone, she (performed three clockwise and counterclockwise circumambulations), paid homage and prostrated, having paid homage and prostrated, she stood with folded hands, not too close nor too far from the Lord Mahavira, facing him, listening attentively, with humility, she began to worship.
_Then the wife of Sakadalputra, Agni Mitra, bathed, (performed daily and occasional duties, adorned the body, performed auspicious rituals to ward off bad dreams and other defects), wore pure, assembly-worthy (auspicious, excellent) clothes, adorned the body with a few precious ornaments. Surrounded by a group of maids, she mounted a religious, excellent chariot, having mounted, she passed through the middle of the city of Polaspur, having passed, she reached the Sahasramravan garden, having reached, she descended from the religious, excellent chariot, surrounded by a group of maids, she went to where the Lord Mahavira was seated, having gone, she (performed three clockwise and counterclockwise circumambulations), paid homage and prostrated, having paid homage and prostrated, she stood with folded hands, not too close nor too far from the Lord Mahavira, facing him, listening attentively, with humility, she began to worship.
209. Then the Lord Mahavira, the Ascetic, preached the Dharma to Agni Mitra and the assembly present. The Ascetic Lord Mahavira preached the Dharma to Agni Mitra and the assembly present.
210. Then that wife, Agni Mitra, having listened to the Dharma from the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, with joy and without hesitation, paid homage and prostrated to the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, having paid homage and prostrated, she said, "I will become a Niggantha, Lord! I will become a Niggantha, Lord! I will become a Niggantha, Lord! Thus, Lord!" As you have said. Just as there are many who, in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, (kings, Kshatriyas, Mahājanas, Bhāḍas, Jōhas, Pasathāras, Mallās, Lecchās, and other many kings, sword-wielders, club-wielders, codas, and other envious, wealthy, army-commanders, and ministers) become monks, leaving their homes, I will not do so in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, becoming a monk, leaving my home. I will renounce the five vows, the seven trainings, and the twelve householder-dharmas in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās.
Alas, Devānupāpiyās! Do not kill me.
The wife of Sakadalputra, Agni Mitra, having listened to the Dharma from the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, with joy and without hesitation, paid homage and prostrated to the Ascetic Lord Mahavira, having paid homage and prostrated, she said, "I will become a Niggantha, Lord! I will become a Niggantha, Lord! I will become a Niggantha, Lord! Thus, Lord!" As you have said. Just as there are many who, in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, (kings, Kshatriyas, Mahājanas, Bhāḍas, Jōhas, Pasathāras, Mallās, Lecchās, and other many kings, sword-wielders, club-wielders, codas, and other envious, wealthy, army-commanders, and ministers) become monks, leaving their homes, I will not do so in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās, becoming a monk, leaving my home. I will renounce the five vows, the seven trainings, and the twelve householder-dharmas in the presence of the Devānupāpiyās.
Alas, Devānupāpiyās! Do not kill me.
1. See Sutra number 11. 

Page #209:
---------------------------
[168]
The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra was pleased. She bowed and paid homage to the Lord. After bowing and paying homage, she said, "O Bhagavan! I have faith in the Nirgrantha teachings (I believe in the Nirgrantha teachings, the Nirgrantha teachings are pleasing to me, O Bhagavan! This is so, this is true, this is the truth, this is desired, this is accepted, this is desired and accepted), as you have expounded, so it is. O Devānupriya! Just as many of your fierce guardians, ministers of the king of enjoyment (members of the council of advisors of the king of the Rajanya, officials of the Kshatriya dynasty, Brahmanas, Subhatas, warriors, soldiers, administrators, members of the Mallaki republic, members of the Lichchhavi republic, and many other kings, powerful, sword-wielding, arrogant, wealthy, wealthy commanders and merchants) etc. have become monks, having renounced their household life, I am unable to become a monk (by renouncing my household life and entering the Anāgāra dharma). Therefore, I wish to take the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, twelve types of Shravaka dharma from you.

When Agni Mitra said this, the Lord said, "O Devānupriya! Do what makes you happy, do not delay."

**Discussion**

The words Mallaki and Lichchhavi in this Sutra point to a very important period in Indian history. While today, Europe, especially England, is often called the birthplace of democracy (mother of democracy), in India, the successful use of a democratic system of government took place millennia ago. In the time of Bhagavan Mahavira and Buddha, there were many such states in what is now eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, where people elected representatives to govern according to their own special republican system. The word "king" was used for them too, but it did not denote the owner of a hereditary kingdom. The word "king" is used for both Bhagavan Mahavira's father Siddhartha and Buddha's father Shuddhodana, but they were elected kings or members of the council of government of the confederate states, who were responsible for the governance of a particular area.

These confederate states are described in many places in ancient Pali and Prakrit texts. Some confederacies would join together to form a larger confederacy. The Vajji confederacy was famous, which included mainly the Lichchhavis, Nāyas (Jñātrikas), and Vajjis. The Shakyas of Kapilavastu, the Mallas of Pava and Kushinara, the Mauryas of Pippalivan, the Videhas of Mithila, the Lichchhavis of Vaishali, and the Nāyas were very famous in the confederate states of that time. The word Mallaki used here is for those associated with the Malla confederate state, and the word Lichchhavi is for those associated with the Lichchhavi confederate state. Bhagavan Mahavira's father Siddhartha was associated with the Lichchhavi and Nāya confederacies. The head of the Lichchhavi confederate state was Chetaka, whose sister Trishala was married to Siddhartha. That is, Chetaka was Bhagavan Mahavira's maternal uncle. The Kalpasutra mentions a federal community consisting of nine Mallakis, nine Lichchhavis, and eighteen republics of Kashi and Kosala. 

Page #210:
---------------------------
## Seventh Study: Sakdalputra

[169 were gathered. This assembly was led by Chetak. Its main purpose was to face the attack of Kunik Ajatashatru.
_ The description of the parliaments, systems, administration, etc. of these republics that we read in Pali and Prakrit texts reveals that our country had thought deeply about the democratic system thousands of years ago. The republic had an assembly, which served both as the government and the judiciary. The head of the republic, who presided, was called the chief king. The republic had a capital, where assemblies were held. The capital of the Lichchhavis was Vaishali. At that time, our country was at the peak of wealth, grain and prosperity. Vaishali was a very prosperous and advanced city during the time of Lord Mahavira and Buddha. According to a Tibetan account, Vaishali was divided into three parts, which had seven thousand, fourteen thousand and twenty-one thousand houses respectively. Vaishali was a metropolis at that time, so these three divisions were probably Vaishali, Kundapur and Vanijyagram. Lord Mahavira also has a special name, Vesaliy (associated with Vaishali). Lord Mahavira was associated with the Nay (known) Sangha under the Lichchhavi Sangha.
211. Then, that Agni Mitra, having accepted the five Anuvratas, the seven Shikshavrata, the twelve types of Shravak Dharma from the Saman Bhagavan Mahavira, bowed and prostrated to the Saman Bhagavan Mahavira. Having bowed and prostrated, she mounted the same righteous chariot and returned in the same direction from which she had come. Departure of the Lord
212. Then, the Saman Bhagavan Mahavira departed from the city of Polasapura, the Sahasrambavana garden, and spent a day wandering in other Janapadas.
213. Then, that Sakdalputra became a Shramanopasaka, knowing the Jiva-Ajiv and other principles. He began to live a religious life. Arrival of Goshalak
214. Then, that Gosala Mankaliputra, known as the Laddha, the Saman, said to Sakdalputra: 1. See Sutra number 64. 

Page #211:
---------------------------
[170]
The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra states that the Ajivika Sadalputra abandoned the Ajivika doctrine and embraced the teachings of the Shramanas (Jain monks). Mankhaliputra Gosala, upon hearing this, decided to visit Sadalputra and persuade him to return to the Ajivika fold. He traveled to the city of Polasapura with the Ajivika community, entered the Ajivika assembly, and then, along with some other Ajivikas, went to where Sadalputra was staying.

Sadalputra, upon seeing Mankhaliputra Gosala, ignored him, neither acknowledging him nor showing him any respect. He remained silent, ignoring Gosala's presence.

[215]
Mankhaliputra Gosala, seeing Sadalputra's indifference, began to praise the virtues of the Shramanas, particularly the great Mahavira, hoping to win him back. He addressed Sadalputra, saying, "Devānupriya! Did a great Mahamahan come here?"

[216]
Sadalputra responded, "Devānupriya! Who was this Mahamahan?" (He was asking who Gosala was referring to.)

[217]
Mankhaliputra Gosala replied, "The Shramanas..." 

Page #212:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sadalputra

The Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror.
Sadalputra, by what name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known?
Indeed, Sadalputra, the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, is known as the one who has attained knowledge and insight, the one who is worthy of great respect, the one who has attained the complete destruction of karma. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.

Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahagova?
Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahagova?
The Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, came to this Mahagova.
Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.

Indeed, Sadalputra, the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, in this forest of samsara, many beings are perishing, decaying, being cut, being broken, being destroyed, being consumed, being extinguished, being guided by the righteous path, being brought together, and attaining the great liberation. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.

Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahasatthavaha?
Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Mahasatthavaha?
The Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, came to this Mahasatthavaha.
Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.

Indeed, Sadalputra, the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, in this forest of samsara, many beings are perishing, decaying, being cut, being broken, being destroyed, being consumed, being extinguished, being guided by the righteous path, being brought together, and attaining the great liberation. Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.

Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Maha-dhamma-kahi?
Did the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, come to this Maha-dhamma-kahi?
The Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, came to this Maha-dhamma-kahi.
Thus, Sadalputra, by this name is the Venerable Mahavira, the Great Conqueror, known.

1. See Sutra - Number 188.
2. See Sutra - Number 188. 

Page #213:
---------------------------
[172]
And, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great Mahālaya, in this world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being eaten, being cut, being pierced, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. Therefore, Devānupriyā! Thus is the Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra called the Great Dharma-speaker.

Come now, Devānupriyā! Is there a Great Protector here? Who, Devānupriyā! is the Great Protector? The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra is the Great Protector. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world. By what means?

Thus, Devānupriyā! The Śramaṇa Bhagavān Mahāvīra, in this great ocean of the world, saves many beings who are perishing, being destroyed, being mutilated, being disfigured, being led astray, being entangled in the net of passions, overwhelmed by the power of wrong beliefs, covered by the eight karmic obscurations, from the eighty-four hundred thousand hells and the forty-four hundred thousand births in the world
Page #214:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra

[173]  Having become, nurturing, protecting, supporting them and bringing them to the vast enclosure of liberation. Sakdalputra! Therefore, I call the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira the Mahagopa.

Goshalak said again, Devanupriya! Did the Mahasarthavaha come here? Sakdalputra-Mahasarthavaha, whom do you call? Goshalak-Sakdalputra! Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Mahasarthavaha. Sakdalputra-How?

Goshalak-Devanupriya! In this terrifying forest of the world, many beings are perishing, decaying, (being consumed, pierced, broken, stolen) and being destroyed, protecting them through the path of Dharma, leading them on the path of Dharma, supporting them and bringing them to the great city of liberation. Sakdalputra! With this intention, I call them the Mahasarthavaha.

Goshalak-Devanupriya! Did the Maha Dharmakathi come here? Sakdalputra-Devanupriya! Who is the Maha Dharmakathi? (Whom do you mean?) Goshalak-Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Maha Dharmakathi. Sakdalputra-In what sense is Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira the Maha Dharmakathi?

Goshalak-Devanupriya! In this vast world, many beings are perishing, decaying, being consumed, pierced, stolen, being destroyed, going astray, corrupted from the righteous path, afflicted by falsehood, covered by the veil of eight types of karma-like darkness, explaining to them the truth in many ways, analyzing, supporting them and taking them out of the terrifying forest of the world, which is the four-devas, humans, animals, and hellish realms. Therefore, Devanupriya! I call them the Maha Dharmakathi.

Goshalak asked again-Devanupriya! Did the Mahaniryamka come here? Sakdalputra-Devanupriya! Who is the Mahaniryamka? Goshalak-Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira is the Mahaniryamka. Sakdalputra-How?

Goshalak-Devanupriya! In the great ocean of the world, many beings are perishing, decaying, and being destroyed, drowning, diving, flowing, supporting them and taking them to the shore of liberation by the Dharma-filled boat. Therefore, I call them the Mahaniryamka-helmsman or the great ferryman. Discussion

In this sutra, many adjectives have been used to indicate the many qualities of Bhagwan Mahavira, among them are 'Mahagopa' and 'Mahasarthavaha'. Both of these are very important. 

Page #215:
---------------------------
## 174]
[Upasakadasangasutra]

The time of Lord Mahavira was an era where cattle herding was prevalent in the country. The wealthy householders of that time kept thousands of cows. As mentioned earlier, cattle wealth was a symbol of prosperity, and it was also important for its utility and for providing employment to a large number of people. In such a cow-centric era, the importance of the cowherd - the Gop - was not less. The metaphor of Lord Mahavira as 'Maha Gop' described here hints at the society's cow-herding culture. The Gop, who controls the cows, does not let them wander in search of better grass, etc., does not let them get lost, and brings them back to their enclosure in the evening. Similarly, this metaphor envisions the Lord as a protector and benefactor of the people, who saves beings from wandering in the world and guides them safely to the enclosure of liberation.

The term 'Mahasarthavah' is also very significant. In those days, Sarthavah referred to merchants who traveled long distances for trade, either by land or by water. If they traveled by land, they would carry many carts and wagons loaded with goods, selling them where they found profit and loading up with cheaper goods elsewhere. If these journeys were by sea, they would take ships. The journeys were quite long, and the ship would carry all the necessary things along with the goods to be sold, such as drinking water, food, medicines, etc. The conductor of these journeys was called Sarthavah.

A special feature of such a Sarthavah was that when he wanted to undertake such a trade journey, he would announce it openly in the entire city. Anyone who wished to join this journey for trade could come with their goods in carts, wagons, or ships, and the Sarthavah would take care of all the arrangements. If they ran short of money, the Sarthavah would provide it. This was a great convenience for small traders with limited resources, as they did not have the means to travel alone. There was also the fear of robbery and plunder on long journeys, which was not a concern with the Sarthavah, as he would have an armed contingent of guards with him.

Thus, small traders could rely on their meager resources to trade far and wide. From a social perspective, this tradition was indeed very useful and important. Therefore, the Sarthavah enjoyed great social prestige and respect in those days.

Jain Agamas describe many such Sarthavahs. For example, the 15th study of Nayadhammakhao describes the Blessed Sarthavah. When he wanted to undertake a trade journey from Champa to Ahikshatra, he made a similar public announcement in the city, inviting anyone who wished to join his Sarth to do so willingly.

Acharya Haribhadra, in the fourth Bhava of Samradityakatha, mentions a similar journey of a Sarthavahputra named Dhan, when he was traveling from his residence, Susharmanagar, to Tamralipti. He also made a similar... 

Page #216:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra

[175. He announced his journey.
_ The use of the term "Mahasarthavah" to describe Lord Mahavira is indicative of the social respect associated with the term. Just as a Mahasarthavah takes ordinary people with him and brings them to a very large commercial market, so too does Lord Mahavira help beings wandering in the world to reach liberation, which is the ultimate goal of life's business.
219. Then, the Shramanopasaka Sakdalputra said to Gosala Mankaliputra, "Devanupriya! You are so clever, discerning (skilled-clever-firm-eloquent-possessing a voice), skillful-subtle-sighted, nayavadi-policy-speaker, upadeshalabdha-obtained from the wise, learned, knowledgeable-obtained-possessing special knowledge, are you able to debate with my Dharmacharaya, Dharmaupadeshaka, Bhagavan Mahavira?
Gosala - No, that is not possible.
Sakdalputra - Devanupriya! How can you say that you are not able to debate with my Dharmacharaya (Dharmaupadeshaka Shraman Bhagavan) 1. See the Sutra itself. 

Page #217:
---------------------------
[176]
[Upasakadasangasutra]
Is he not capable of engaging in philosophical discussions with Mahavira?
Goshalak - Sakdalaputra! Just as a strong, healthy, excellent writer, with steady fingers, perfect and complete, with well-nourished hands and feet, with well-formed limbs like back, sides, thighs, etc., capable of enduring, with very dense, round shoulders like the embankment of a pond, capable of performing exercises like leaping, crossing, jumping long distances, swimming, jumping high, etc., quickly or speedily, a practitioner of exercises with leather bags filled with pieces of bricks, maces, etc., whose body is marked with signs from being struck by round pieces of stone the size of a fist, strung on a leather rope, while exercising - thus, whose body is strong and powerful through exercise, internally enthusiastic and powerful, with strong and long arms like two palm trees, suitable, efficient, quick-acting, proficient in the work of obtaining, skilled in the art, having reached the subtlety of the art - such a young man, wherever he grabs the paw, foot, hoof, tail, wing, horn, hair of a large goat, ram, pig, rooster, partridge, quail, dove, pigeon, cuckoo, crow, or hawk, he makes it motionless and still, in the same way, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, wherever he catches me with various philosophical meanings, questions, reasons, and analyses, he will make me speechless. Sakdalaputra! Therefore, I say that I am not capable of engaging in philosophical discussions with your Dharmacharaya Bhagwan Mahavira.
Arrival of Goshalak in the Potter's Quarter
220. Then, Sakdalaputra, the Shraman Upasak, said to Goshalak Mankhaliputra, "Devanupriya! You are praising the truth, reality, facts, and true nature of my Dharmacharaya (religious teacher, Shraman Bhagwan) Mahavira. Therefore, I invite you to a hospitable seat, (platform-bed) and a comfortable place to stay, not as a matter of religion or penance. You may stay in my potter's quarter, accepting the hospitable seat, platform, (bed and comfortable place to stay).
221. Then, Goshalak Mankhaliputra, hearing this from the Shraman Upasak Sakdalaputra, accepted the hospitable seat, platform, (bed and comfortable place to stay) in the potter's quarter and stayed there. 

Page #218:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra]
. [177 Mankhaliputra Goshalak accepted this statement of the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra and he remained in his workshops, accepting the sacrificial seat, (plank, bed, stretcher). Disappointed journey
222. Then, that Gosala Mankhali-putra did not convince the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra in any way, for many Nirgranthas, Pavayanas, were agitated, disturbed, or changed by him, either by persuasion, instruction, explanation, or announcement. Being in that state, he left the city of Polasapura, and after leaving, he wandered in the forest of people.
Mankhaliputra Goshalak, by saying in many ways, by explaining the truth with different types of knowledge, by explaining it well, and by speaking according to his mind, could not make the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra deviate from the Nirgrantha-preaching, disturb him, or make him change - he could not change his feelings. So he left the city of Polasapura, tired, exhausted, and dejected, and wandered in other regions. Divine affliction
- 223. Then, that Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, being devoted to the observance of vows, spent fourteen years. While the fifteenth year was passing, in the middle of the night, he was meditating in the Poshasala, according to the Dharma-Pannatti adopted by the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira.
In the meantime, the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, being self-absorbed through the observance of vows, spent fourteen years. When the fifteenth year was passing, once in the middle of the night, he was meditating in the Poshasala, according to the Dharma-Pannatti adopted by the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira.
224. Then, in the middle of the night, a god appeared before that Shramanopasak Sakdalputra.
In the middle of the night, a god appeared before the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra.
225. Then, that god, holding a large blue lotus, approached the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra and said to him: Just as the Chulani-piya does, so does the god afflict. He makes nine offerings of flesh to each son, until he wounds him, and after wounding him, he heals him. 1. See Sutra-number 122 2. See Sutra-number 92 3. See Sutra-number 116 4. See Sutra-number 136 5. See Sutra-number 136

Page #219:
---------------------------
[178]
The Devata (divine being) drew out a large, blue sword and spoke to the Shramanopasaka (Jain lay devotee) Sakdalputra in the same way, inflicting the same kind of suffering as he had done to Chulani Pita. He killed Sakdalputra's eldest, middle, and youngest sons, sprinkling their flesh and blood upon him. The only difference was that here the Devata cut each son into nine pieces of flesh.

[226] Even so, the Shramanopasaka Sakdalputra remained fearless and engaged in his Dharma-dhyana (meditation on the principles of Jainism).

[227] Seeing Sakdalputra fearless, the Devata approached him for the fourth time and said, "O Sakdalputra! Shramanopasaka! You who desire death! If you do not break your vows, I will bring your wife Agni Mitra, who is your Dharma-sahayika (helper in Dharma), Dharma-vijiya (one who heals Dharma), Dharmanuragaratta (one who is devoted to Dharma), and Sam-sukh-dukkh-sahayika (one who shares your joys and sorrows), from your home. I will bring her before you and kill her, cut her into nine pieces of flesh, boil her in a cauldron filled with boiling water, and then sprinkle your body with her flesh and blood. This will cause you to suffer from intense pain and anguish, and you will die prematurely."

**Discussion**

In this Sutra, Agni Mitra is described as a "Dhammavijiya," which is also known as "Dharmavaidya" in Sanskrit. This is a unique and unparalleled epithet in Indian literature, possibly not used by anyone else. Just as physical life is subject to ailments, diseases, pain, and suffering, so too can spiritual life become unhealthy, diseased, and painful. A decline in enthusiasm for Dharma is a form of spiritual sickness, frustration is a form of spiritual ill-health, and finding Dharma unpleasant is a form of spiritual pain. Just as there are remedies for physical ailments, there are also remedies for spiritual ailments. 

Page #220:
---------------------------
Seventh Study: Sakdalputra

[179 Just as a skilled physician is needed for a suitable cure, so too is a skilled person needed to provide religious health. Agni Mitra was such a skilled 'Dharma Vaidya'.
From a wife to her husband, service, love, affection - all these are attainable, but when needed, religious inspiration, spiritual enthusiasm, the support of practice can be obtained, this is a unique thing. Very few wives will be able to re-energize the drying religious source in their husband's life. Agni Mitra had this wonderful quality. Therefore, the epithet 'Dharma-Vaidya' used for her is very meaningful. This is the reason why Sakdalputra, who remains unshaken and unmoved at the time of the merciless, cruel murder of his three sons, trembles at the news of Agni Mitra's murder, loses his composure, becomes agitated. Perhaps it occurred to Sakdalputra - Agni Mitra, who is not only the sole companion of my religious life, but also the unparalleled inspirer who has made me righteous by removing the religious weaknesses that come to me, will be given such a tragic end? This will cast a deep darkness on my future life.
228. Therefore, when the Dev said this to the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, he remained in meditation.
Even after being told this by the Dev, Sakdalputra remained fearless and engaged in Dharma-Dhyana.
229. Then that Dev, again and again, said the same thing to the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra - "O! Sakdalputra! Shramanopasaya! I say this to you."
_Then that Dev, again and again, said the same thing to the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra. Inner Purity Worship: End
230. Then, when that Dev said this to the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra, he was in meditation, and this thought arose in his mind - "Just as the potter thinks, 'My eldest son, my middle son, my youngest son, all of them are coming, and even my wife Agni Mitra, who shares my joys and sorrows, she also wants to take me away from this house, and my head will be cut off.' So, this is what I have to do to this man." He thought with a bitter heart. Just as the potter thinks, so should everything be said. When Agni Mitra, his wife, heard the commotion, she said, "The rest is as the potter would say, and when the red-colored chariot is ready, it will be taken to the Mahavideha." (Four similes are established in this chapter)
1. See Sutra number 98. 2. See Sutra number 136.

Page #221:
---------------------------
[180]
[Upasakadasangasutra Nikkhevo' || The seventh anga of Upasakadasana, the seventh study is complete ||]

Upon being told the same thing again, for the second and third time, by the Devadvara, the Shramanopasak Sakdalputra's mind became like that of the Chulani-pita. He began to think - "The one who killed my eldest son, my middle son, and my youngest son, and sprinkled their flesh and blood on my body, now wants to bring my wife Agni Mitra, who is my companion in happiness and sorrow, home and kill her in front of me. It is in my best interest to catch this man." Thinking this, he ran.

The subsequent events should be understood like those of the Chulani-pita.

Sakdalputra's wife Agni Mitra heard the commotion. The rest of the story is similar to that of the Chulani-pita. The only difference is that Sakdalputra was born in an Arunabhut Vimana. (There, his age is said to be four Palyopama.) He will become a Siddha-Mukta in the Mahavideha Kshetra.

"Nikkhepa"2 The study of the seventh anga, Upasakadasha, is complete ||

1. Thus, Jambu! I declare that this is the meaning and essence of the seventh study, as told by the Samana with his attainment. 2. Nigamana Arya Sudharma said - Jambu! The Siddhi-prapta Bhagavan said this meaning and essence of the seventh study of Upasakadasha, which I have told you. 

Page #222:
---------------------------
Eighth Study Summary: In Brief

_ Rajagriha was a renowned city in North India during the time of Lord Mahavira. King Shrenik, who is known as Bimbisara in Buddhist literature, was the ruler of this city, and he is frequently mentioned in Jain literature. Maha Shataka, a wealthy merchant, resided in Rajagriha. He held a very high position in the city in terms of wealth, possessions, splendor, influence, and honor. His treasury contained eight crore bronze vessels filled with gold coins, an equal amount was invested in trade, and an equal amount was used for the splendor and furnishings of his home. In the previous seven studies, the wealth of the Shraman Upasakas was expressed in terms of the number of coins, while Maha Shataka's wealth is described in terms of the number of bronze vessels filled with gold coins. Bronze was a measuring vessel. Those who possessed vast wealth, so much that even counting the coins was considered a labor, counted the vessels filled with coins instead of the coins themselves. Maha Shataka was the owner of such vast and immense wealth. He had eight Gokuls, each containing ten thousand cows.

The practice of polygamy was prevalent among the wealthy and influential people in the country. It is possible that, along with worldly pleasures, it also involved a sense of displaying one's grandeur. Maha Shataka had thirteen wives, among whom Revati was the most prominent. Maha Shataka's wives were also from wealthy families. Revati received eight crore gold coins and eight Gokuls, each containing ten thousand cows, as her personal property from her parents. The remaining twelve wives received one crore gold coins and one Gokul, each containing ten thousand cows, as their personal property from their respective parents. It seems that in those days, wealthy people gave their daughters such property, which, according to the social customs of the time, remained under their daughters' control. It is possible that this property and Gokuls remained in the daughters' parental homes, where they continued to grow. This also gave the daughters of wealthy families influence and authority in their in-laws' homes. They were also financially independent.

_ By chance, Shraman Lord Mahavira arrived in Rajagriha, and a gathering assembled to see him and listen to his teachings. Maha Shataka was so prosperous and happy in worldly terms, but he was not lost in his wealth and luxury. Like others, he also reached Lord Mahavira's presence. He listened to the teachings. His soul was inspired. Like others, he also accepted the Shravaka vows. He limited his possessions to eight crore bronze vessels filled with gold coins in his treasury. He resolved to limit his cattle wealth to eight Gokuls. He practiced celibacy. 

Page #223:
---------------------------


Page #224:
---------------------------
## Eighth Study: Summary: In Brief]
[183
"The arrows do not strike the chest."1
Mahataka was truly a warrior - an unparalleled possessor of self-strength. Even the amorous situation, the arousing gestures, even those of his own wife, did not disturb the steady-minded seeker in the least. He remained immovable and unshakable in his devotion, like the Himalayas. Revati tried to entice him again, a second time, a third time, but not even a speck of her influence fell upon Mahataka. He remained absorbed in his religious meditation. This was the victory of renunciation over indulgence. Revati returned with a dejected face.
Mahataka's path of practice continued to progress and develop. He gradually worshipped eleven images in the proper manner. Due to intense austerity and religious practices, his body became very thin. He thought, "It would be best if the remaining life is used entirely for practice." Accordingly, he accepted the life-ending Sanlekhana, the fast unto death. He immersed himself in spirituality. He attained Avadhi-knowledge.
On one hand, there was this holy state, and on the other, the sinful Revati was burning in the fierce flames of lust. She could not bear it. She again set out to break the vow of the Shraman Upasaka Mahataka, and came to the Poshadshala. It is a great wonder that it did not even occur to her, "I am a fallen woman, it is true, but my husband is engaged in the final, excellent practice of this life, and by trying to break his vow, am I not doing a most reprehensible and heinous act, the sin of which will never allow me peace?" The truth is, the intellect of lustful addicts, sinful humans, who are addicted to meat and alcohol, is destroyed. They fall lower and lower, getting entangled in more and more heinous sinful acts.
This is why, in Jainism, great emphasis is placed on the renunciation of meat and alcohol. They are listed among the seven vices, which are completely to be abandoned by humans. 1. "There are heroes on earth who are strong in drinking and gambling,
Some are skilled even in killing ferocious beasts. But I say in the presence of the strong,
Few are the men who can conquer the pride of Cupid."
"As long as he is on the right path, so long does he prosper,
As long as he is ashamed of his senses, so long does he embrace humility.
Those with eyebrows raised, with loose hair, with blue eyes,
As long as the arrows of desire do not fall upon the hearts of the playful."
   Shringar Shataka 75-76
"Meat, alcohol, prostitutes, hunting, theft, and adultery.
These seven vices are great sins, the wise should abandon them."
Padmanandi Panchavimshika 1, 16. Gambling, meat-eating, alcohol-drinking, prostitution, hunting, theft, and adultery are the seven vices in the form of great sins. A wise man should abandon them. 

Page #225:
---------------------------
[184]
The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra tells the story of Revati, a woman from a noble family in Rajgriha, the wife of a respected and honorable Gahapati. However, she falls prey to vices and forgets her dharma, her reputation, and her noble lineage. She shamelessly tries to bring down her devoted husband.
As the great poet Kalidasa said, "True heroes are those whose minds remain unperturbed even in the presence of disturbing situations."
Mahataka was indeed a hero. This is why even such a disturbing situation could not corrupt his mind. He remained steadfast in his devotion.
Revati repeated her attempts, twice, thrice. The Shraman Upasaka Mahataka, who had been composed until then, was slightly disturbed. He saw Revati's future through his Avadhijnana and said, "You will be afflicted by a terrible Alsak disease within seven nights and die in great sorrow, anguish, pain, and distress. After death, you will be born as a Nairyaika in the Ratnaprabha Naraka, in the Lolupacyuta Naka, for eighty-four thousand years."
As soon as Revati heard this, she trembled. The woman who had been intoxicated by alcohol and consumed by sensual pleasures, suddenly saw the black shadow of death dancing before her eyes. She returned to her home with the same feet. And it happened exactly as Mahataka had said. Within seven nights, she was afflicted by the terrible Alsak disease, and died in agony and unbearable pain, destined for hell.
By chance, Lord Mahavira was in Rajgriha at that time. Being omniscient, he knew everything that had happened with Mahataka. He informed his chief Antavasi, Gautam, and said, "Gautam! Mahataka has made a mistake. For an Upasaka who has accepted the final Sanlekhana and Anashan, even truth, reality, and facts are not to be spoken if they are harmful, unpleasant, and distressing. He should not speak such truths to anyone that would cause them fear, terror, or pain. The truth that Mahataka spoke to Revati through his Avadhijnana was of this nature. Go and tell Mahataka to perform Alochana-Pratikraman and accept atonement for this."
This is how profound and elevated the Jain philosophy is. It shows that in the life of a self-realized seeker, there should be complete equality, non-violence, and friendliness.
Gautam went to Mahataka and delivered Lord Mahavira's message. Mahataka humbly accepted it, performed Alochana-Pratikraman, and became pure.
The Shraman Upasaka Mahataka, with renewed self-strength, continued his devotion with enthusiasm and joy. He left his body in Samadhi at the appropriate time and was born as a Deva in the Arunavatansaka Vimana in the Saudharma Kalpa.
2. "Those whose minds remain unperturbed even in the presence of disturbing situations, they are indeed heroes."
Kumarasambhava, Canto 5

Page #226:
---------------------------
## Eighth Study
## The Great Ratak
## The Shramanopasak Mahatak
### 231. The Eighth Ukkheva.
Thus, Jambū! At that time, in that era, there was a city called Rajagṛha. Outside the city was a caitya called Guṇasīla. Śreṇika was the king there.
**Utkṣepa** - The beginning of the eighth study with an introduction is as follows:
The Ārya Sudharma said - Jambū! At the end of the fourth Āra of the present Avasarpini, at that time - when Bhagavan Mahāvīra was alive, there was a city called Rajagṛha. Outside the city was a caitya called Guṇasīla. Śreṇika was the king there.
### 232. There, in Rajagṛha, a Gāthāpati named Mahāśataka resided. He was prosperous, like Ānanda in wealth and splendor. The only difference was that he had eight crore bronze-limited gold coins kept in his treasury as secure wealth, eight crore bronze-limited gold coins engaged in trade, eight crore bronze-limited gold coins engaged in the splendor of his home. He had eight Brāja-Gokula, each with ten thousand cows.
**Each**
**Discussion**
In the present sūtra, the extent of Mahāśataka's wealth is described in terms of bronze-limited gold coins.
1. If, Bhante! Bhagavan the Śramaṇa has established this meaning of the seventh study of the Upāsakadaśā, then Bhante! What is the meaning of the eighth study?
2. Ārya Sudharma asked Jambū - If the Siddhi-prapta Bhagavan Mahāvīra has established this meaning of the seventh study of the Upāsakadaśā, then Bhagavan! What meaning did he establish for the eighth study? (Please tell me.) 

Page #227:
---------------------------
[186]
The Upasakadasangasutra states that "Kaansya" refers to a specific type of vessel made of bronze. In ancient times, along with counting and weighing, measurement was also prevalent. Vessels of a specific size were used for this purpose, capable of holding a specific quantity of material. Here, "Kaansya" refers to such a vessel.

The wealth of the MahaShataka was so vast that even counting the gold coins was difficult. Therefore, such a vessel filled with gold coins was considered as one unit to express the magnitude of their wealth.

Ancient Ayurvedic texts discuss these ancient measurements. In ancient times, there were two types of weights and measures: Magadh-maan and Kalinga-maan. Magadh-maan was more prevalent and accepted. The Bhavaprakash discusses this in detail. There, based on the teachings of Maharshi Charak, the Magadh-maan is explained, starting from the Paramanu (atom) and progressively increasing the units of measurement. It states:

"Thirty Paramanus make one Trasarenu, also called Vanshi. The tiny particles visible in the rays of sunlight falling through a sieve, each is called Trasarenu or Vanshi. Six Trasarenu make one Marichi. Six Marichi make one Rajika or Rai. Three Rai make one Sarso, eight Sarso make one Jau, four Jau make one Ratti, six Ratti make one Masa. Masa is also called Hem and Dhanak. Four Masa make one Shaan, also called Dharan and Tank. Two Shaan make one Kol, also called Kshudrak, Vatak, and Drankshan. Two Kol make one Karsha. Panimanika, Aksh, Pichu, Panital, Kinchitpani, Tinduk, Vidalpadak, Shodashika, Karamध्य, Hansapad, Suvarna, Kavlagrah, and Udumbar are its synonyms. Two Karsha make one Ardhapala (half Pala). It is also called Shukti or Ashtamika. Two Shukti make one Pala. Musti, Amra, Chaturthika, Prakunch, Shodashi, and Bilva are its names. Two Pala make one Prasruti, also called Prasrit. Two Prasruti make one Anjali. Kudav, Ardha Sharavak, and Ashtaman are also its names. Two Kudav make one Manika. It is also called Sharav and Ashtapala. Two Sharav make one Prastha, meaning Prastha contains 64 Tola. Earlier, 64 Tola was considered as one Seer, therefore Prastha is considered as a synonym of Seer. Four Prastha make one Adhak, which is... 

Page #228:
---------------------------
[187
Eighth Study: Maha Shataka] Bhajan, bronze vessel and being of sixty-four palas, it is also called Chatuh-Shatti-Pala.
This means that the vessel in which 256 tolas or 4 seers of material could be contained was called bronze or bronze vessel. - This was not the only measure of bronze or bronze vessel. It is believed that bronze vessels were used in many different sizes. The bronze vessel mentioned in this sutra was larger than the bronze vessel described in the Bhava Prakash. In the 235th sutra of this chapter, Shramanopasaka Maha Shataka sets a limit in relation to his daily transactions, according to which he resolves not to use more than two drona-parimita gold coins in a day. Let's understand this clearly.
The value up to Adhaka has been discussed above. Bhava Prakash further states that one Drona is equal to four Adhakas. It is also called Kalash, Nalvana, Arman, Unman, Ghat and Rashi. Two Dronas make one Shurp, which is also called Kumbha, and being of 64 Sharavas, it is also called Chatuh-Shatti Sharavaka. This means that the vessel in which two Dronas, i.e. eight Adhakas or 32 Prasthas, i.e. 64 1. Charak's opinion is considered by the physicians, because his opinion is considered by them. Discarding all measures, Magadha measure is called.
Trisara Nu is said by the wise to be of three hundred atoms. Trisara Nu is a synonym, it is called Vanshi.
Vanshi is seen by the sun's rays passing through the net.
One Marichi is made of six Vanshis, and one Rajika is made of six Marichis.
One Sarsapa is said by the wise to be made of three Rajikas.
One Yava is said to be made of eight Sarsapas, and one Gunja is made of four Yavas.
One Masha is made of six Raktikas, O wise one.
One Shana is made of four Masha, and one Dharana is said to be that.
That is called Tanka, and two of them are called Kola.
Ksudraka, Vataka and Drankshana are also said to be that.
Two Kolas make one Karsha, it is called Panimani.
Aksha, Pichhu, Panitala, a little bit of Pani and Tindaka.
Vidala Padaka and sixteen are considered.
Kar Madhya, Hansapada, Suvarnaka, Valagraha.
Udumbar is also a synonym, it is called Karsha.
One Ardha Pala is made of two Karshas, and one Shukti is made of eight Karshas.
One Pala is known to be made of two Shuktis, one Musti is made of four Shuktis, and one Ramra is made of four Shuktis.
One Prakuncha is made of sixteen, one Bilva is called Pala.
One Prasruti is made of two Palas, and one Prasrita is also called that.
One Anjali is made of two Prasrutis, one Kudava is half a Sharavaka.
One Mana is known to be made of eight Kudavas, and one Manika is made of two Kudavas.
One Sharava is eight Palas, that is known by the wise.
One Prastha is made of two Sharavas, and one Adhaka is made of four Prasthas.
Bhajan, bronze vessel and sixty-four Palas.
Bhava Prakash, First Part, Second Part, Mana Paribhasha Prakarana 2-4 One Kalasha, Nalvana, Arman, Unman, Ghat and Rashi are made of four Adhakas.
Bhava Prakash, First Part, Second Part, Mana Paribhasha Prakarana 15, 16 One Droni, Vaho and Goni are made of two Shurpas.
One Shurp Kumbha is made of two Dronas, and one Chatuh-Shatti Sharavaka is made of sixty-four Sharavas.

Page #229:
---------------------------
[188]
The *Shurpa* or *Kumbha* was a vessel that could hold 32 *ser* (a unit of weight) of goods. In this sutra, *Kansya* or *Kansyapaatra* is a synonym for *Shurpa* or *Kumbha*. The *Bhaavaprakash* commentator has used the word *Kansya* in this sense, because a *Shurpa* or *Kumbha* is equivalent to two *dronas* (a unit of volume), and the description here refers to a bronze vessel of two *dronas*. The *Sharangdhara-Samhita* also mentions it in the same way.

Wives: Their Wealth
233. The great *mahaashataka* had thirteen beautiful wives, starting with *Revati*. (They were all perfect in their five senses, their bodies were complete and unbroken, they were skilled in their respective fields, they had auspicious signs on their hands, and they were virtuous and chaste. They were also beautiful in every way, with a complexion like the moon, and their appearance was captivating.)

234. The great *mahaashataka*'s wife *Revati* had eight crore gold coins and eight *vayas* (a unit of land) as her personal wealth from her father's house. The remaining twelve wives had one crore gold coins and one *vaya* of land each as their personal wealth from their father's houses.

The *mahaashataka*'s Vow and Practice
235. At that time, the Lord Mahavira arrived in Rajagriha. The assembly gathered. The *mahaashataka* was overjoyed. He renounced his worldly possessions. He gave away eight crore gold coins, eight *vayas*, and his thirteen wives, including *Revati*, to the remaining *mehuna* (a type of ascetic). He gave away everything else in the same way. He also made this vow: "I will accept this offering, and I will make a vessel of bronze, weighing one *hirna* (a unit of weight), that can hold two *dronas*." 

Page #230:
---------------------------


Page #231:
---------------------------
[190]
The wife of the story-teller, Revati, having found a favorable opportunity, killed six of her twelve co-wives by the use of weapons and six by the use of poison. Thus, having killed her co-wives, she acquired one Gokul each from her paternal home and lived with the great assembly of ascetics, enjoying abundant pleasures.
Revati's fondness for meat and liquor
[240] The wife of the story-teller, Revati, was fond of meat, intoxicated by meat, a vulture, a glutton, and she enjoyed various kinds of meat, both roasted on iron bars, fried in ghee, and roasted on fire, as well as liquor, honey, meraka, madya, sidhu, and prasanna, enjoying, savoring, and consuming them.
Discussion
This sutra mentions liquor, honey, meraka, madya, sidhu, and prasanna, which Revati used. Ayurvedic texts describe asavas and arishta, as well as madya. While asavas and arishta also contain some amount of alcohol, they are not included in intoxicating substances or madya. Madya has a different status. It contains a high amount of intoxicating substance, which causes the drinker to become insane, lose his judgment, and become degenerate.
The main reason for including madya with asava and arishta in Ayurveda is the similarity in their method of preparation. Herbs, fruits, roots, essence, flowers, stems, leaves, bark, etc. are ground and mixed with water to prepare a solution, which is then sealed in a jar or other container with cloth and mud and buried in the ground or kept in the sun. While the prescribed time is one month, the solution ferments within a few days, producing a unique smell, taste, and effect. It takes the form of asava. A decoction of herbs, etc. with water is prepared and when one-fourth of the water remains, it is stored in a container and buried in the ground or kept in the sun. After due processing, it becomes arishta. The liquid buried in the ground or kept in the sun 

Page #232:
---------------------------
Eighth Study: Maha Shataka ]
[191 When its essence is extracted by the Mayur-Yantra-Vashpa-Nishkasan-Yantra, it is Madya. It contains a very high amount of intoxication. It is essential to add jaggery or sugar and Rangajad or similar root-roots in the preparation of Madya.
In the Ayurvedic texts where the types of Madhira are described, these names have also come in different ways, which are indicated in this Sutra. Their brief description is as follows:
According to Sura-Bhavprakash, the Madya prepared from the flour of Sali and Saathi grains is called Sura.
Madhu - The Madya in which honey is also added along with other substances. In Ashtaangahridaya it is called Madhava Madya. In Sushruta Samhita it is mentioned as Madhvasava. Its preparation with honey and jaggery is mentioned.
Merak - In Ayurvedic texts it is mentioned as Mareya. In Sushruta Samhita it is called Triyonit, i.e. it is prepared from a mixture of Sura made from flour, Asava made from jaggery and Madhu.
Madya - This Madya is generally the name of Madhira, but here it is probably related to the Mardik type of Madhira. According to Sushruta Samhita, it is prepared from grapes or raisins.
Sidhu - In Bhavprakash, the Madya made from sugarcane juice is called Sidhu. It is prepared separately from both ripe and unripe sugarcane juice. There is a difference in the intoxication of both.6
Prasanna - According to Sushruta Samhita, the clear upper part of Sura that has settled down is called Prasanna or Prasanna. 1. Sali-Shashti Kapishtaadikrut Madyam Sura Smrita.
-Bhavprakash Purva Khand, Pratham Bhag, Sandhan Varga 23. 2. Madhvasavo Maaksikena Sandhiyate Madhavaakhyo Madyavishesha:
-Ashtaangahridaya 5,75 (Arunadattakrut Sarvangasundara Teeka). 3. Madhvasava Madhugudabhyam Sandhanam.
   Sushruta Samhita Sutra Sthan 45, 188 (Dalhanacharyavirachit Nibandh Sangrah Vyakhya). Sura Paishti, Asava Cha Gudayo Nih, Madhu Cha Deyamiti Triyonitvam.
-Sushruta Samhita Sutra Sthan 45, 190 (Vyakhya). 5. Mardikam Draakshodbhavam.
-Sushruta Samhita Sutra Sthan 45, 172 (Vyakhya) 6. Ikshoh Pakvai Rasai: Siddhai: Sidhu: Pakvarasa Cha Sah. Amai: Tai: Reva Yah Sidhu: Sa Cha Shitarasa: Smrit.
 _-Bhavprakash Purva Khand, Pratham Bhag, Sandhan Varga 25. 7. Prasanna Suraya Mand Uparyachcho Bhag:
 Sushruta Samhita Sutra Sthan 45.177 (Vyakhya) 

Page #233:
---------------------------
[192]
[Upasakadasangasutra
In Ashtaangahriday, the synonym of Vaaruni is Prasanna. According to that, the upper part of Sura is Prasanna. The thick part below it is called Jagal. The part below Jagal is called Medak. The liquid extracted by squeezing the remaining Kalk below is called Bakkas.
241. Therefore, in the city of Rajagriha, a proclamation was made not to kill Amar-Praani.
242. Then, that Revayi, the wife of Gaathapati, who was fond of meat and addicted to it, called her father's servants and said to them - You bring me two calves from my father's Gokuls every day.
The wife of Gaathapati, Revati, who was fond of meat and addicted to it, called her father's servants and said to them - You bring me two calves from my father's Gokuls every day.
243. Then, those servants of the father of Revayi, the wife of Gaathapati, accepted her statement with humility, saying 'as ordered'. And they started bringing two calves every day from her father's Gokuls.
The servants of the father of Gaathapati, Revati, accepted her statement with humility, saying 'as ordered'. And they started bringing two calves every day from her father's Gokuls.
244. Then, that Revayi, the wife of Gaathapati, used to eat the meat of those calves with great relish, along with six types of Sura and four types of Asaemaani.
The wife of Gaathapati, Revati, used to eat the meat of those calves with great relish, along with six types of Sura and four types of Asaemaani.
245. Then, that Mahaasayag, the Shramanopasak, who was filled with various types of Sila and Bhava, lived for fourteen years. And he used to keep his son in the same way, until he became a Dharmapannaati in the Posahala.
_ Shramanopasak Mahaashatak, filled with various types of vows and rules, lived for fourteen years. And he used to keep his son in the same way, until he became a Dharmapannaati in the Posahala.
1. Vaaruni Prasanna. Vaarunyaadhobhaago ghano Jagalah. Jagalasyadho bhaago Medakah. Paaniyena madyakalkapidano utpanno Bakkasah.
Ashtaangahriday Sutra Sthaan 5, 68 (Tika). 2. See Sutra-number 112 3. See Sutra-number 92

Page #234:
---------------------------
## Eighth Study: The Great Century

[193 years have passed. Like Anand and others, he also established his eldest son in his place. He entrusted the family and social responsibilities to his eldest son and himself remained engaged in religious worship in the Poshadshala. Revati's sensual attempt to derail the Great Century]

246. Then that Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, intoxicated, staggering, repeatedly throwing her Uttariya-Dupatta or Odhna, came to the Poshadshala where the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak was. Coming, she repeatedly displayed seductive glances, gestures, and expressions that aroused desire and madness, and spoke to the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak: "O Shramanopasaka Mahashatak! You who desire, wish, and are eager for Dharma, Punnya, Heaven, and Moksha! You who are devoted to Dharma! Why are you not enjoying the abundant pleasures of human life with me, Devānupriya? What will you gain from Dharma, Punnya, Heaven, and Moksha? What more will you get from them than what you would get from me?"

247. Then that Shramanopasaka Mahashatak did not pay any attention to the words of Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, nor did he consider them. He remained engaged in Dharma-Dhyana, unmoved and unconcerned.

248. Then that Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, spoke to the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak again and again, saying: "O! I am telling you, and you are doing the same, you are not paying any attention to me, nor are you considering me." He remained unmoved and unconcerned, engaged in Dharma-Dhyana.

249. Then that Revati, the wife of the Gahapati, unheeded and unconsidered by the Shramanopasaka Mahashatak, went back in the same direction from which she had come. 

Page #235:
---------------------------
## 194]
[The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra, Great Century, Increasingly Growing Practice]

250. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, having accepted the first Upasaka-Pratimā, practiced the first Ahasutta, up to the eleventh.
The Shramanopasaka, Great Century, accepted the first Upasaka-Pratimā. Thus, he practiced all the Pratimās from the first to the eleventh, according to the scriptural method.

251. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, due to his intense austerities, became so emaciated that his veins became visible.
Due to intense austerities, the Shramanopasaka, Great Century, became so emaciated that his veins became visible.  He practiced Amaran Anashan (fasting unto death).

252. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, while remembering the Dharma, during the time of the previous night, thought to himself, "Thus, I am emaciated due to these austerities, just like Ananda.  Therefore, I will accept the final Maranantik Sanlekhanā, and abandon food and drink.  I will practice Anashan, and without desiring death, I will remain absorbed in worship."
One day, at midnight, while remembering the Dharma, the Shramanopasaka, Great Century, thought to himself, "Thus, I am emaciated due to these austerities, just like Ananda.  Therefore, I will accept the final Maranantik Sanlekhanā, and abandon food and drink.  I will practice Anashan, and without desiring death, I will remain absorbed in worship."

253. Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, due to his auspicious determination, (auspicious outcome, inner transformation, due to the purified Leshyas), the Avadhijnana Avarana Karma was destroyed, and Avadhijnana arose.  As a result, he could see and know the salt sea, one thousand yojanas in each direction, east, west, south, and north, up to the Chullahimavanta Vasahara mountain.  He could see and know the earth, which is red due to the radiance of the gems, and the hell, which is eighty-four thousand yojanas in extent.
Then, the Great Person, the Shramanopasaka, due to his auspicious determination, (auspicious outcome, inner transformation, due to the purified Leshyas), the Avadhijnana Avarana Karma was destroyed, and Avadhijnana arose.  As a result, he could see and know the salt sea, one thousand yojanas in each direction, east, west, south, and north, up to the Chullahimavanta Vasahara mountain.  He could see and know the earth, which is red due to the radiance of the gems, and the hell, which is eighty-four thousand yojanas in extent.

1. See Sutra number 73. 

Page #236:
---------------------------
## Eighth Study: The Great Century

[195] He began to know and see the region up to the Himalayas, the mountain of the year, in the north, and in the netherworld, the first hell, Ratnaprabha, up to the hell called Lolupacyuta, which has a lifespan of eighty-four thousand years. Revati's repeated unsuccessful attempts.

254. Then that Revati, the wife of the poet, intoxicated with wine, became mad (staggering, with disheveled hair), repeatedly throwing her upper garment, went to the Poshadshala, where the ascetic Mahaśataka was. Arriving, she spoke to Mahaśataka as before. (You do not enjoy the abundant pleasures of human life with me, O beloved of the gods! What will you get from dharma, merit, heaven, and liberation?) She said it a second time, a third time, and then the same again.

Mahaśataka's prediction of Revati's unfortunate future.

255. Then that ascetic Mahaśataka, the great century, became angry when his wife Revati spoke to him in this way a second time, a third time. He used his knowledge of the future, used it, and knowing by his knowledge of the future, he said to his wife Revati: "O Revati, who desires death! You will be afflicted by the disease called Alasaka within seven nights, and being tormented, distressed, and helpless, you will die peacefully at the end of your lifespan, and after death, you will be born in the first hell, Ratnaprabha, in the netherworld, in the hell called Lolupacyuta, among the hell-dwellers who have a lifespan of eighty-four thousand years."

This sutra mentions the disease Alasaka, from which Revati suffered greatly before her death.

Alasaka is a severe disease of the stomach and intestines. It is described in the Matrashitiya chapter of the Ashtanga Hridaya. There it is written:

"A person who is weak, has a slow digestive fire, and who holds back the urge to defecate and urinate, will have wind that travels through the air passages." 

Page #237:
---------------------------
[196]
The Upasakadasangasutra states that it also spoils bile and phlegm. When the air is vitiated, the food eaten gets stuck in the stomach due to phlegm, becomes sluggish, lethargic, and immobile, causing excruciating pain like a sharp object piercing, intense, unbearable colic, vomiting and bowel movements are obstructed, preventing the vitiated food from coming out. In other words, the stomach gets clogged with phlegm-ridden food. It is called Alasa or Alasaka disease. ''1
In the same context, there is a discussion of Dandakalasa, which is the most severe form of Alasaka, it is written
"Extremely contaminated or vitiated doshas, bound by contaminated raw juice, block the body's channels, become transverse, paralyze the whole body like a stick, the body's expansion and contraction stops, it is called Dandakalasa. It is incurable, it quickly ends the patient."2
Madhavanidan also discusses Alasaka in the context of indigestion. It is written there
"In the disease where the abdomen or stomach remains bound, i.e., there is a feeling of tightness, there is a constant spasm, the pain is so severe that the person starts groaning, the wind does not move downwards but rushes upwards towards the stomach, the bowel movements and apanavayu completely stop, there is thirst, belching occurs, it is called Alasaka."3
It is clear from the symptoms described in Ashtanga Hriday and Madhavanidan that Alasaka is a very painful disease.
Visheshad durbalasyalpavade vegavidharinah. Piditam marutena annam shleishmanaruuddhamantara || Alasam kshobhit doshaih shalyatvenaiva samsthitam. Shulaadinkurute teevraaschchhadityasara varjitann || So'lasah
Due to weakness etc., the food eaten by the one who has a strong urge to hold back, is particularly affected by the wind inside the stomach and is blocked by phlegm, becomes sluggish, and is agitated by the doshas, it is very painful and remains in the form of a sharp object, it causes intense, unbearable colic, etc., except for diarrhea. This is the disease called Alasa. A weak person with depleted tissues cannot tolerate food, and due to weak digestive fire, food does not digest properly. Therefore, it is specifically mentioned that for those who have a strong urge to hold back, the obstructed wind moves in the wrong direction, and bile and phlegm also move in the wrong direction.
Ashtanga Hriday 7.10, 11 with commentary 2. ...Atyarth duṣṭāstu doṣā duṣṭā'mabadhḍakhāḥ. Yāntastir yaktanuṁ sarvāṁ daṇḍavatstam bhayanti cet ||
Ashtanga Hriday 8. 12 3. Kukhshirahannyate'tyarthṁ pratāmyet parikajati.
Niruddho marūtaścaiva ku kṣāvupari dhāvti || Vātava) Nirodhaśca yasya'tyarth bhavedapi. Tasyālasakamacaṣṭe tṛṣṇodgārāu ca yass tu ||
Madhavanidan, Indigestion Diagnosis 17, 18

Page #238:
---------------------------
[197
Eighth Study: MahaaShataka] The Sorrowful End of Revati
256. Then that Revati, the Gahaavaini, having been spoken to by the MahaaShataka, the Shramanopasaka, said to herself, "The MahaaShataka, the Shramanopasaka, is angry with me, he has ill-will towards me, he wants my harm, I don't know by what evil death I will be killed." Thinking thus, she became fearful, terrified, distressed, agitated, and trembling with fear, she slowly left from there and came home. Her mind became filled with sadness, (she was immersed in the ocean of worry and sorrow, with her face in her palms, lost in deep meditation, her gaze fixed on the ground) she became distraught and lost in thought.
257. Then that Revati, the Gahaavaini, overwhelmed by the laziness of the disease, became afflicted with severe pain and suffering. She spent her time in misery, and after completing her lifespan, she was born in the Naraka called Loluppaachyuta in the Ratnaprabha, the first Naraka, among the Naireyikas who have a lifespan of eighty-four thousand years.
The Message of Inspiration from Gautama to the Lord
258. At that time, the Shraman, Bhagavan Mahavira, arrived in Rajagriha. The Samavasarana took place. The assembly gathered, listened to the Dharmadeshana, and then departed.
259. "Gotama! This Shraman, Bhagavan Mahavira, said, "Gotama! In this city of Rajagriha, there is a Shramanopasaka named MahaaShataka, who is my devotee, who is staying in a Posha-sala, who is suffering from a disease that is causing him to lose his body, and who is spending his time in the last stages of life, waiting for death."
1. See Sutra number 11. 

Page #239:
---------------------------
[198]
The Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira addressed Gautam, saying: "Gautam! Right here in the city of Rajgriha, my follower, the Shraman Upasak named Mahashatak, is engaged in the worship of the final, death-inducing Sanlekhana in the Poshadshala. He has renounced food and water, not desiring death, but is immersed in Dharma worship.
260. Therefore, his wife, Revati, went to the Poshadshala in a state of intoxication, (stumbling, with her hair disheveled, repeatedly throwing her upper garment) and approached Mahashatak. (Repeatedly displaying seductive gestures, glances, and expressions of desire) She spoke to the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak about worldly pleasures. She said the same thing a second time, and a third time.
The incident unfolded as follows: Mahashatak's wife, Revati, went to the Poshadshala in a state of intoxication, (stumbling, with her hair disheveled, repeatedly throwing her upper garment) and approached Mahashatak. (Repeatedly displaying seductive gestures, glances, and expressions of desire) She spoke to the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak about worldly pleasures. She said the same thing a second time, and a third time.
261. Upon hearing Revati's words for the second and third time, the Shraman Upasak Mahashatak became angry. He used his Avadhijnana, and applied it. Knowing through Avadhijnana, he said to Revati: (O Revati, who desires death! Within seven nights, you will be afflicted by a disease called Alasak, and you will suffer, be distressed, and be helpless. When your lifespan is complete, you will die peacefully, and descend to the lower realms. 1. See Sutra number 254 2. See Sutra number 255 3. See Sutra number 84 

Page #240:
---------------------------
Eighth Study: The Great Century ]
[199 The first hell realm, Ratnaprabha, in the Lolupacyuta hell, will be born among the Nairyakas who have a lifespan of eighty-four thousand years.)
Gautama! Truth, reality in the form of truth or without remedy, fact without exaggeration or understatement, words spoken by the true Jinas that are completely present, even if they are undesirable - which are not desirable, unpalatable - which are unpleasant to hear, unpleasant - which cause displeasure in the mind, unmindful - which the mind does not want to speak or hear, unmindful - which the mind does not want to think or accept - if they are like this, then it is not conceivable - Dharma-prescribed for a Shramanopasaka who is engaged in the worship of the final, fatal Sanlekhana, who has accepted fasting. Therefore, Devanupriya! You go to the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka and tell him that for a Shramanopasaka who is engaged in the worship of the final, fatal Sanlekhana, who has accepted fasting, even if the words of truth (truthful, factual, true) are undesirable, unpalatable, unpleasant, unmindful, unfavorable to the mind, then it is not conceivable to speak. Devanupriya! You have spoken true but undesirable words to Revati. Therefore, you criticize this place - the conduct contrary to Dharma, accept the appropriate atonement.
262. Then, the venerable Gautama heard this statement of the Shraman, the venerable Mahavira, 'You are right' with humility. Having heard it, he departed. He entered the city of Rajagriha through the middle, and having entered, he went to the house of the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, to the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka.
The venerable Gautama heard this statement of the Shraman, the venerable Mahavira, 'You are right' with humility. Having heard it, he departed. He entered the city of Rajagriha through the middle, and having entered, he went to the house of the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, to the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka.
263. Then, the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka saw the venerable Gautama coming. Having seen him, he was delighted and happy. He bowed and prostrated to the venerable Gautama.
264. Then, the venerable Gautama said to the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, "Indeed, Devanupriya! The Shraman, the venerable Mahavira, speaks, explains, and does not approve. Devanupriya! It is not conceivable for a Shramanopasaka to speak (in the last, fatal Sanlekhana, fasting, fasting, food, drink, and medicine, to others, to those, to those, to all, to the undesirable, to the unpalatable, to the unpleasant, to the unmindful, to the unfavorable to the mind). 
1. See Sutra number 12 

Page #241:
---------------------------
[200]
[The Upasaka Dasanga Sutra, Revati Gahavaini, said to the Santis, "Go, Vagariya, you are not a Devana-priya! Go to this place and do penance for your conduct against Dharma.
_Bhagavan Gautama said to the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, "Devana-priya! Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira has declared, spoken, proclaimed, and exemplified - said - (Devana-priya! For a Shramanopasaka engaged in the final Maranantaik Sanlekhana, accepting Anashan, even if the words are unfavorable, unpalatable, unpleasant, unpleasing, and contrary to the mind, it is not appropriate to speak them). Devana-priya! You spoke such words to your wife Revati, therefore you should do penance for your conduct against Dharma at this place. Penance by Mahashataka
265. Then the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka accepted Bhagavan Gautama's words with humility, saying, "You are right," and did penance for his mistake.
Then the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka accepted Bhagavan Gautama's words with humility, saying, "You are right," and did penance for his mistake.
266. Then Bhagavan Gautama departed from the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, passed through the middle of Rajgriha Nagar, and went to where Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira was. He went there, bowed and prostrated to Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, and then, with restraint and austerity, he lived, cultivating his own self.
Then Bhagavan Gautama departed from the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, passed through the middle of Rajgriha Nagar, and went to where Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira was. He went there, bowed and prostrated to Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, and then, with restraint and austerity, he lived, cultivating his own self.
267. Then Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira departed from Rajgriha Nagar at some time and went to other Janapadas.
Then Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira departed from Rajgriha Nagar at some time and went to other Janapadas.
268. Then the Shramanopasaka Mahashataka, having cultivated many virtues and qualities for twenty years, having attained the Shramanopasaka-Pariyaya, and having completely fasted for eleven days, 1. See Sutra-Sukhya 261 2. See Sutra-Sukhya 84 3. See Sutra-Sukhya 87 4. See Sutra-Sukhya 122

Page #242:
---------------------------
Eighth Study: The Great Century ]
[201  The ascetic, having purified himself through a month-long Sanlekhana, having fasted for sixty meals, having performed Alochana-Pratikramana, at the time of death, he relinquished his body in a state of Samadhi. He was born as a deity in the Arunavatansaka Vimana in the Saudharma heaven. His lifespan there is four Palyopama. He will become a Siddha-Mukta in the Mahavideha realm.
Nikkhevo || The study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is complete ||  This Shramanopasaka, through the Great Century, cultivated his soul through various vows, rules, etc. He purified himself. For twenty years, he followed the Shramanopasaka-Shravaka-Dharma. He worshipped eleven Upasaka-images properly. He performed a month-long Sanlekhana and a sixty-meal fast, a month-long fast. He performed Alochana-Pratikramana. At the time of death, he relinquished his body in a state of Samadhi. He was born as a deity in the Arunavatansaka Vimana in the Saudharma heaven. His lifespan there is four Palyopama. He will become a Siddha-Mukta in the Mahavideha realm.
|| Nikkhepa || || The eighth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is complete ||
1. Thus, Jambū! This is the meaning of the eighth study, as it was explained by the Arhat. 2.  The Aryasudharma said, "Jambū! This is the meaning of the eighth study, as it was explained by the Siddha-obtained Bhagavan Mahavira, which I have told you." 

Page #243:
---------------------------
Ninth Study Summary: In Brief

In the city of Sravasti, there lived a wealthy merchant named Nandini-pita. His wealth amounted to twelve crore gold coins, of which one-third was kept as reserve capital, one-third was invested in trade, and one-third was used for household luxuries and amenities. He owned four Gokuls, each with ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Ashwini.

Nandini-pita was living a prosperous and happy householder's life. A beautiful incident occurred. Lord Mahavira arrived in Sravasti. The devout human community thronged to have his darshan. Nandini-pita also went. He listened to the Lord's Dharma-deshana. He was inspired. Like a joyful person, the merchant also accepted the Shravak Dharma.

Nandini-pita continued to develop his vow-filled life. Thus, fourteen years passed. His mind became engrossed in Dharma. He considered it appropriate to free himself from family and social responsibilities. He appointed his eldest son in his place. He himself became engrossed in the worship of Dharma. It was a fortunate coincidence that he did not face any obstacle or hindrance in his worship. He followed the Shravak Dharma perfectly for twenty years. Thus, living a life of meditation like a joyful person, he attained Samadhi-maran and was born as a Deva in the Arunagav Vimana in the Saudharma Kalpa. 

Page #244:
---------------------------
## Ninth Study: Nandi Nipita

**Verse 269:**

Jambū! At that time, in the fourth Āra of the present Avasarpini, in the city of Śrāvastī, there was a Koṣṭhaka Caitya. Jitśatru was the king there.

In the city of Śrāvastī, a wealthy Gāthāpati named Nandi Nipita resided. He had four crore gold coins invested in his household resources. He had four Gokulas, each containing ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Aśvini.

**Verse 270:**

The Lord Mahāvīra arrived in Śrāvastī. A Samvasarana took place. Like Ānand, Nandi Nipita embraced the Śrāvaka-Dharma. The Lord then went to other Janapadas.

**Question 1:**

"Venerable Sir! If the Siddha-prapta Bhagavan Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the eighth study of Upāsaka-Daśā, then what meaning did he explain for the ninth study, Venerable Sir?"

**Question 2:**

Ārya Sudharma asked Jambū: "If the Siddha-prapta Bhagavan Mahāvīra has explained the meaning of the eighth study of Upāsaka-Daśā, then what meaning did he explain for the ninth study, Venerable Sir?" 

Page #245:
---------------------------
[204]
[Upasakadasangasutra 271. Therefore, Nandi Nipita, having accepted the Shramanopasaka dharma, lived a life devoted to dharma.
Life of Sadhana: End
272. Then, Nandi Nipita, the Shramanopasaka, having cultivated many virtues like Anuvrata, Gunavrata, etc., spent fourteen years in this way. He entrusted his eldest son with the family and social responsibilities, just like Anand. He himself became engrossed in the worship of dharma.
Nandi Nipita followed the Shravaka dharma for twenty years. There is a difference between him and Anand, etc. - after giving up his body, he was born in the Arunagav Vimana. He will become a Siddha-Mukta in the Mahavideha region.
"Niksepa" - The ninth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasha, is complete.
1. See Sutra number 64 2. See Sutra number 122 3. And thus, Jambu! This is the meaning of the ninth study, as explained by the Shramanas, which I have told you. 4. Conclusion - The Arya Sudharma said - Jambu! This is the meaning of the ninth study, as explained by the Siddha-obtained Bhagwan Mahavira, which I have told you. 

Page #246:
---------------------------
Tenth Study Summary: In Brief

In Shravasti, there was a wealthy and influential Gahapati named Salihipita. His wife's name was Falguni. Like Nandini Pita, Salihipita's wealth also consisted of twelve crore gold coins, of which one part was kept as secure capital, and two parts were equally invested in trade and household splendor, furnishings, etc.

Once, Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Shravasti. Enthusiasm filled the hearts of the devotees. They flocked to see and hear the teachings of Bhagwan. Salihipita also went. He received spiritual inspiration from Bhagwan's teachings. Like Gahapati Anand, he accepted the Shravak Dharma. After fourteen years, he entrusted his worldly responsibilities to his eldest son, so that he could devote himself more and more to Dharma-aradhana, and he himself engaged in Upasana. He performed the Upasana of the 11 Pratimas of a Shravak as prescribed.

- Salihipita faced no obstacles in his Aradhana-Upasana. In the end, he attained Samadhi-maran. He was born as a Deva in the Arunkeel Vimana in the Saudharma Kalpa. 

Page #247:
---------------------------
## Tenth Study
## The Story of Salhihipita, the Wealthy Patron

**273.** The tenth study begins with an introduction. Thus, Jambū! In that time, in that era, in the city of Sāvatthī, there was a shrine called Koṭṭha. Jitasattu was the king there.

In the city of Sāvatthī, a wealthy and radiant patron named Salhihipita resided. He had four crore gold coins in his treasury as secure wealth, four crore gold coins invested in trade, and four crore gold coins used for the splendor and resources of his household. He had four cow-herds, each with ten thousand cows. His wife's name was Phālguni.

**274.** The same is true for the householder. Just as there is joy, so too is there a decline in worldly dharma. Just as Kāmadeva, so too, the son of Jetu, having attained the Dharma-Pannatti of the Blessed Lord Mahāvīra, dwells in the abode of the monk. The eleven Nirūvasaggā Upāsaka-Paḍimā are also to be spoken of, and they are to be led by the path of Kāmadeva, until they reach the Arunakīla Vimāna in the Sohamme Kalpa, where they are to be honored by the Devatta. There are four parables. The Mahavideha dwells in the Sijjhi.

1. If, Bhante! the Blessed One, the monk, has explained the ninth study of the Upāsaka-Daśā with all its wealth, then, Bhante! what is the meaning of the tenth study?

2. Ārya Sudharma asked Jambū - If the Siddha Mahāvīra has explained the ninth study of the Upāsaka-Daśā, then, Bhante! what is the meaning of the tenth study? (Please tell me) 

Page #248:
---------------------------
Tenth Study: Salihi-pita
[207 || The tenth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is complete. ||] The Bhagwan Mahavira arrived in Sravasti. A congregation was held. Like Ananda, Salihi-pita accepted the Shravak-dharma. Like Kamadeva, he entrusted his eldest son with family and social responsibilities. He remained in the Poshadshala, engaged in worship, in accordance with the teachings of the Angi-krit Dharma. The only difference was that he did not face any obstacles in his worship. He worshipped the eleven Shravak-pratima without any hindrance, as described earlier. His life should be understood like that of Kamadeva. After leaving his body, he was born in the Saudharma-devaloka, in the Arunakiil Vimana, in the form of a deva. His lifespan is four Palyopama. He will attain Siddha-mukti in the Mahavideha Kshetra.
"The tenth study of the seventh Anga, Upasakadasa, is complete." 

Page #249:
---------------------------
## Conclusion

**275.**  The thought of being free from family and social responsibilities and engaging in religious practices arose in the minds of the ten *Shramanopasakas* in the fifteenth year. The ten followed the *Shravaka-dharma* for twenty years.

**276.**  O Jambu! This meaning and essence of the tenth study of the *Upasakadasa*, the seventh *Anga*, was declared by the Siddha, the Lord Mahavira.

**277.**  The *Upasakadasa*, the seventh *Anga*, has one *Shruta-skandha*. There are ten studies. They have a uniform style of recitation, being written in prose. They are recited over ten days. After that, the *Samuddesa-sutra* is stabilized and familiarized over two days, and *Anugnyasanmati* is given. Similarly, the *Sumuddesa* and *Anugnyasanmati* of the *Anga* should be understood.

**"The *Upasakadasa* Sutra is complete."**

1. See Sutra Number
2. 

Page #250:
---------------------------
##  The Collection of Verses

**1.**  The merchants of Sangha-Gaha, the two of Champa, the two of Banaras, the two of Nayari, the two of Purvari, the two of Kampillapur, all these are to be known.

**2.**  The two of Pola, the two of Rajagriha, the two of Savatthi, these cities are to be known by the Uvasaga.

**3.**  Sivananda, Bhadda, Sama, Dhan, Bahul, Pusa, Aggimitta, Revai, Assi, and Faggani, these are the names of the Bhajjana.

**4.**  Ohinna, Pisaya, Maya, Vahi, Dhan, Uttarizja, these are the names of the Bhajjana, the two of Suvva, the two of Duvva, the two of Niruvassagga.

**5.**  The six of Aruna, Arunaabha, Aruna-ppaha, Aruna-kanta, Sita, and Aruna-jjha, these are the names of the great ones.

**6.**  Forty, sixty, eighty, sixty, sixty, sixty, ten thousand, these are the names of the thousands.

**7.**  Twelve, eighteen, twenty-four, three times eighteen, these are the names of the Dhan. Three times twenty-four, twelve, twelve, these are the names of the Kodi.

**8.**  Ullana, Dantavana, Phala, Abhiganuvvatta, Sina, Vattha, Vilevana, Putpha, Abharana, Dhuva, Pejja, these are the names of the things.

**9.**  Bhakhoyana, Suya, Ghae, Sage, Mahura, Jemana, Annapana, these are the names of the things. These are the twenty-two names of the Ananda.

**10.**  Uddha, Sohammapura, Lolua, these are the names of the places in the north of the Himalayas. Five hundred, three hundred, these are the names of the Ohinna, the ten ganas.

**11.**  Darsana, Vaya, Sama, Posaha, Padima, Abambha, Sacchitta, Aram, Bha, Pesa, Uddita, Vajja, these are the names of the Samana.

**12.**  Eleven Padimas, twenty Pariyas, Anasana, these are the names of the months. Sohamme, Chaupaliya, Mahavideha, these are the names of the places.

**Note:** These verses are not part of the original text of the book. They are verses from previous teachers, which provide a brief introduction to the book. 

Page #251:
---------------------------
The details of the Sangraha-gatha are presented below. The Upasakas mentioned in this text were from the following cities:

* **Shramanopasaka:** Anand, Kamdev, Chulnipita, Suradev, Chullashatak, Kundakaul, Sakdalputra, Mahashatak, Nandinipita, Salihipita
* **Cities:** Champ, Varanasi, Varanasi, Alambika, Kampilyapur, Polaspur, Rajgriha, Sravasti, Sravasti
* **Commercial Village:** Nagar

The names of the wives of the Shramanopasakas were as follows:

* **Shramanopasaka:** Anand, Kamdev, Chulnipita, Suradev, Chullashatak, Kundakaul, Sakdalputra, Mahashatak, Nandinipita, Salihipita
* **Wives:** Shivananda, Bhadra, Shyama, Dhanya, Bahula, Pusa, Agni Mitra, Revati (and thirteen others), Ashwini, Falguni

The special events in the lives of the Shramanopasakas were as follows:

* **Anand:** Doubt of Gautam Swami regarding the extent of Avadhijnana, resolved by Bhagwan Mahavira. Devopasarga in the form of Pisachas etc., the Shramanopasaka's steadfastness till the end.
* **Kamdev:** 
* **[210]** 

Page #252:
---------------------------
## Description of the Collected Verses

**[211 Chulani Pita]**
* Breaking of the vow due to the threat of matricide by a deva (god),
* Atonement.
* **Suradeva**
* Breaking of the vow due to the threat of sixteen terrible diseases being inflicted by a deva,
* Atonement.
* **Chullashataka**
* Breaking of the vow due to the threat of a deva scattering gold coins and other wealth,
* Atonement.
* **Kundakaulika**
* A deva praises the Goshalak doctrine by lifting a garment and a ring, Kundakaulika's steadfastness,
* Refutation of determinism, the deva is rendered speechless.
* **Sakadalputra**
* A virtuous wife, Agnimitra, restores her vow-breaking husband to righteousness.
* **Mahashataka**
* The affliction of Revati, who is devoid of vows.
* **Kamohipak**
* Conduct, the unwavering nature of the Mahashataka.
* **Nandini Pita**
* No affliction occurred during the worship of vows.
* **Salihi Pita**
* No affliction occurred during the worship of vows.
* **Shramanopasaka**
* The Shramanopasaka renounced their bodies and were born in the following celestial realms:
* **Shramanopasaka**
* **Celestial Realm**
* **Ananda**
* **Arun Kamadeva**
* **Arunabha Chulani Pita**
* **Arun Prabha**
* **Arunakant Chullashataka**
* **Arun Shreshtha Kundakaulika**
* **Arun Dhwaja Sakadalputra**
* **Arun Bhut Mahashataka**
* **Arunavatans Nandini Pita**
* **Arun Gav Salihi Pita**
* **Arun Keel**
* The number of cattle owned by the Shramanopasaka was as follows:
* **Shramanopasaka**
* **Number of Cows**
* **Ananda**
* 40,000
* **Kamadeva**
* 60,000
* **Chulani Pita**
* 80,000
* **Suradeva**
* 60,000
* **Suradeva** 

Page #253:
---------------------------
## Chapter 212

[Upasakadasangasutra
Chullasataka
60,000 Kundakaulika
60,000 Sakadalputra
10,000 Mahasataka
80,000 Nandini-pita
40,000 Salihi-pita
40,000 Shramanopasakas possessed the following gold coins:
Shramanopasakas
Gold coins
Ananda
12 crore
Kamadeva
18 crore
Chulni-pita
24 crore
Suradeva
18 crore
Chullasataka
18 crore
Kundakaulika
18 crore
Sakadalputra
3 crore
Mahasataka
Bronze-measured
24 crore
Nandini-pita
12 crore
Salihi-pita
12 crore
Ananda etc. Shramanopasakas observed the following 21 rules:
1. Towel for wiping the body, 2. Datun, 3. Fruit for cleansing hair and body, 4. Massage oil, 5. Ubtan, 6. Water for bathing, 7. Clothes to wear, 8. Perfume, 9. Flowers, 10. Ornaments, 11. Incense, 12. Drink, 13. Food-sweets, 14. Rice, 15. Soup-lentils, 16. Ghee, 17. Vegetables, 18. Madhurak-honey drink, 19. Dishes-dahi-bade, pakoras etc., 20. Drinking water, 21. Mouth freshener-paan and fragrant spices to be put in it.
Among these ten Shramanopasakas, Ananda and Mahasataka attained Avadhi-knowledge, whose extent or range was as follows:
Ananda in the east, west and south directions in the salt sea up to five hundred yojanas, in the north direction
Chullhimalayan mountain, in the upward direction up to Saudharma Devaloka, in the downward direction in the first Naraka
Bhoomi Ratnaprabha in the place called Lolupacyuta. Mahasataka in the east, west and south directions in the salt sea up to one thousand yojanas, in the north direction
Chullhimalayan mountain, in the upward direction up to Saudharma Devaloka, in the downward direction in the first Naraka
]
Page #254:
---------------------------
[Collection - Description of the Verses]
From the land of Ratnaprabha to the place called Lolupacyuta.
Each Shramanopasaka had accepted 11-11 images, which are as follows:
[213
1. Darshan - image, 2. Vrat - image, 3. Samayik image, 4. Poshad - image, 5. Kayotsarga - image, 6. Brahmacharya - image, 7. Sachittahar Varjan - image, 8. Swayam Aarambh - Varjan - image, 9. Bhritak - Preshyaarambhavarjan - image, 10. Uddishta - Bhakta - Varjan - image, 11. Shramanabhoot - image.
All these Shramanopasakas followed the Shravak-dharma for 20-20 years, finally renounced their bodies through a month-long Sanlekhana and fasting, and were born as Devas in the Saudharma Devaloka with a lifespan of four-four Palyopamas. After the Deva-bhavana, all will be born in the Mahavideha Kshetra and attain Moksha.
|| Upashakadasha Sampt ||
1. The Maha Shataka does not mention the extent of the Avadhigyan. 

Page #255:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Jain Terms:

**Word** | **English Translation** | **Sutra References**
------- | -------- | --------
अइक्कम | aikkama | 47, 49, 50, 53
अइदूर | aidur | 59, 208
अइभार | aibhar | 45
अइयार | aiyar | 44-57
अइरित्त | airitt | 52
अइवाय | aiway | 13, 45
अकंत | akant | 261
अकरणया | akaranaya | 53
अकाल | akal | 95, 102, 107, 127, 133, 160
अक्खुभिय | akkhubhiy | 96
अगरू | agaru | 29, 32
अग्ग | agg | 94, 95, 101
अग्गओ | aggao | 130, 132, 133, 136, 227, 230
अग्गहत्थ | agghatth | 94
अग्गजीह | aggjiha | 94
अग्गि | aggi | 238
अग्गिमित्ता | aggimitta | 183, 200, 204, 205, 208
अंग (देह का भाग) | ang (part of the body) | 210, 211, 227, 230
अंग (जैन आगम) | ang (Jain Agam) | 101
अंगुली | anguli | 2, 117, 175, 277
अचलिय | achaliy | 94
अचवल | achval | 96
अच्चणिज्ज | accanijja | 77, 78
अच्चासन्न | accasanna | 187
अच्छ | achch | 208
● अच्छि | achchi | 
अच्छिंद | achchind | 
अजीव | ajiva | 
अज्ज (अद्य) | ajja (today) | 
अज्ज (आर्य) | ajja (Aarya) | 
अज्जुण | ajjun | 
अज्झत्थिय | ajjhatthiya | 
अज्झयण | ajjhayan | 
अज्झवसाण | ajjhavasan | 
अज्झोववन्न | ajjhovavanna | 
अंजण | anjan | 
अट्ट | atta | 
अट्टहास | attahas | 
अट्टय | attay | 
अट्ठ (अर्थ) | attha (meaning) | 
अट्ठ (अष्ट) | attha (eight) | 
अट्ठम | attham | 
अट्ठ | attha | 
अड | ad | 
अडवी | adavi | 
अड्ढ | addha | 
अणणुपालणया | ananupalanaya | 
अणतर | anantar | 
अणभिओअ | anabhiyoa | 
अणगार | anagar | 
अणगारिय | anagariya | 
अणंग | anang | 
अणवकखमाण | anavakkhaman | 
अणवट्ठिय | anavatthiya | 
अणसण | anasan | 
अणागय | anagay | 

Page #256:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[215
101
Word Anagalia Anadhaijjaman Anadhayamaana Anaria Analatta Anikkhitta Ani? Aniya Anutthana Anuppada / Anuppavisa Anubhava Anuratta Anuraga Anuwaya Anuvvigga Anesana Anh Atattha Anta Antara Atanradha Antalikkha Antiya
Sutra Word
Sutra 107 Adhara 216, 249 Anna
58,111,175, 184 215 Annattha
16-42,58 136, 145, 163 Annamna
79 58 Annaya
63,66,73,74,88,120, 76
166, 185, 195, 241, 267 261 Apacchima 73,79, 252, 259, 261 168,169,171, Apathiya
95,97,132,133, 142 169, 170,171 Apariggahiya
48 Aparijaanamaana
215 111, 262 Aparijaanijjaman
216 169 Aparibhuya
3,8,125 Pariyana
247, 248 181, 227 Apurisakkara 169, 170, 171, 198, 199 54 Appa
10,114, 190, 208 96 Appauliya
51 86 Appadilehia 175, 185,192 Appamajjia 96 Appaana
66,76,89, 181 179 Appiya
261 66,223 Apphodant
50 Abbakkhaana 41,111,168,187,192 ।। Abhangana 12,13,58,61,78,86 Abbanunnaaya
77,78,86 192, 202, 204, 211, 223 Abbhuggaaya
77,78 Abhioga
79, 259 Abhiggajjata 195, 255, 257 Abhigaya
44,64,181,213 73,83,84,85,168,169 Abhigginha
58, 235 169, 171,192 / Abhiggha
58, 235 62,89, 122 Abhibhuya
218, 255, 257 15, 47 Abhimukha
218 79,86 Abhirūiya
58 127,130,133, 227 Abhirūva
111 184 Abhilasa
101
95
Atūriya Antevaasi Anto Aththi
Atthagaiya Adinnaadaana Adūra / Addaha Addha
48 

Page #257:
---------------------------
## 216]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Word / Abhivanda Abhisamannnaagaya Abhiiya
5
200
Amanam Amanunna Amaagaya Ammaga Ammaya Amma Ay (Ayas) Ay (Aj) Ayam
Sutra Word
Sutra 81 Avajjhaya
256 111,169,170,171 Avadalya 96,98,103, 108, 116 Avar 66,93, 126, 166, 175, 185, 139,226,228
192, 223, 224, 238, 252 261 Avasesa
16-42, 234, 235 261 / Avahara 241 Avi 147 Avitah 138 Aviraat 138 Asai 94 Asan
58,66,68 219 Asaddhaman
111 2,73,80,91,181, 230 Asambhanta
77,78,96 252, 276 Asamahipatta
255 95 Asi
95, 99, 116, 127, 138, 151 101 Asur
187 187 Asog
166, 175, 185, 192 89 Assini
269 156 Aham 12,66,73, 81, 86,95, 102 274
107, 111, 127, 132, 133, 139 272 Ahad 179 Ahari
94 149 Aha 12,56,70,77,79,210,250 230 Ahigarn
52 238 Ahijjamana 164 / Ahiyaas (Abhi-vasay) 100,106,141 62 Ahiyaas (Adhivas)
100 59, 190, 208 Aheen
6,233 101 Ahe
74, 102,105, 253 255, 257 Aho (Adhah, Samas mein)
50 184 Aho(Aamantaran ke arth mein) . 111,136,163 23 / Aikkha
79,111,264 101 Aukkhaya
90, 123 54 Auso 43 / Aaos
200
Ayasi Aya Araha Arun Arunakant Arunakeel Arunagav Arunajjhaya Arunappbha Arunabhuya Arunavadinsay Arunasittha Arunabha Alankiya Alamba Alasaya Alinjaraya Alla Allina Avgaasiya Avajjhana
47
117

Page #258:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[217
57
Agar
74
Word Sutra Word
Sutra Shape 94 Rectangle
195 / Aagachch 188 Aayahiṇ
10,190 Aagamana
/Araah
70,71 Aagay
86,216,218 Araahana 107 /Aroha
197 Aagaar 12 Aalambana
5,66 Aagaas 136, 145, 154 Aalabhiya
157, 160,163 Aaghavana
222 / Aalaav Aajiviyovaasag 182,183,184,186 / Aaloay 84-87,89,261,264,265 188,191,194,203 Aavana
184,193,194,220,211 Aajiviyovaasay 181,185, 187,190, Aavaranijj
192, 193, 195-202, 204 Aasaanasa Aajiiviy 181, 214 Aasana
111 Aadov 107 Asaiy
145,154 / Aada 215,247 Aasaemaani
240, 244 Aanattiy 206 Aasi
197 Aanand 2,3,5,10,12,58,62, 204, Aasuratt
95,99, 105, 109, 116 232, 252,270,274
130,138,255,261 Aanavana
54 Ahay Aanamiy 101 Ahayay
195 Aanad (Aadaan)
15, 47,51 Aahaar (Aadaar) Aadaan (Aardrahan)
127,130,133 Aahaar (Aahaar) / Aadiy (A-da) 58, 119, 177 I (Iti)  44,86, 117, 168, 169, Aadiy (Aadik)
29,32
175, 192, 199, 200, 251 Aadaar
66 I (Api, Chitt) 63,66,73,74,88, / Aapucch 5, 68,69, 62
120,185, 195,112, Aabharan 10,31, 190,208
238, 241 252, 254, 267 / Aabhiiy
255, 231 Iii / Aamant
117,175 Ingaal Aamlay
24 / Icch
77,136,154,163, 202 Aayank
152,154,156 Icchha / Ayanch 127,130, 133,136, 140,151, Icchhiy
12,58 154, 158,163, 225, 227, 230 Itth Aayariy (Acharit)
43 Idddi
111,169,170,171 Aayariy (Aayary) 73,188,219, 220 Ittariy
200
112
17

Page #259:
---------------------------
## 218]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Sutra 3,7,74, 253
168
166 172, 246,254 58,175
27
This
101
41, 197 - 101
239,242 86,169,198 136,145,154
187, 188,193 95,99,116,127,238, 206
218
218
Word
Sutra word now
66 Answer Indabhui
76 Uttarijj 58,94, 133, 136, 142, Uttarijjag
154, 163, 169, 230, 235 Uttarijjay Imeyaruv
66,136, 188,193 Utthiya Iv
102 Udaga 44,57,86, 188,216,259 Udagg Ihalok
57 Uday Iriya
78 Udar Isar
5,12,66 / Uddav Ukkad
107 Udaahu Ukkhev
124, 157,269, 273 Uppaiya Ukkhev
150,165,231 Uppanna Ugg (Ugra)
76, 107 Uppal Ugg (Arashak Adhikari)
210 Uppiyaman / Uggah
77 Ummagg Ucch
78 Ummay / Uccar (Uccar-Uccaran) 141, 235 Ur Uccar (Uccar)
55,69 Urabbh Uccavay
66 Ural Ucchud
76 Ullaniya Ujjal
100,106,141 Uvaes Ujjan
157,165, 180,190,208 Uvaesay Ujjug
206 / Uvakar Ujjovamana
111 / Uvakkhad / Ujjh
95 Uvagay
94 Uvchiya Uttiyam
27 / Uvatthav Uttiya
94,184,197 /Uvan U8 (Osth)
94 / Uvadansemana / Utt (Uttha )
193 / Uvanimant Uttan
73, 168, 169, 171, Uvabhog
198, 199, 200 Uvma Ud
111,208 / Uvavjj 50,74, 102,105 Uvavann
246 94,107,109
-94 72,76,81, 238,239, 246
22 43,46, 219 76, 219
68
68
Utt
69,96,97,98,219, 249
94,95
206 243
246 187,188,193, 220
22,51,52 62,94, 255
62,90, 255 89, 122, 156, 164
Ud

Page #260:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[219
Sutra
214
44
Word
Sutra word 230, 257, 268, 274
84, 85, 86, 92 Uvva'a
272 Esan Uvvaas 55, 66, 95 Esanijj
58 Uvvey 206 Ogghahiy
206 Uvasagg 112, 116, 117, 146, 156, 225 / Oginh
220, 221 / Uvasampjj
66, 69, 70, 92, 121, Odan 125, 148 Osah
58 Uvvatta'n
26 Osah / Uvagacch 10, 58, 69, 77, 78, 80, 82 Ohay
256 86, 92, 95, 102, 107, 137, 256 Ohi
74, 83, 253, 255, 261 Uvaasag 70, 71, 121, 250, 268 K
2, 86, 90, 91, 123, 164, 169 Uvaasagadsa 2, 276, 277
196, 198, 200, 217 Uvvigg
256
218, 219, 256 / Uvvih
102, 105 Kaiva'y Usseh 76 Kakkas
107 Uru
94 Kankha / E (Iyat Athava Evam Samas Mein) 84 Kankhiy
86, 95, 246 E (I) 81, 187 Kjj
5, 68, 125 Ekk 16, 182 Kancan
101, 206 Ekkasarag
277 Katth Ekkaras 89, 122, 179, 250, 268, 274 Kadahay
127, 130, 133, 227 Ekkarasam
71, 148 Kadil 
Ekkek 225 Kanag
76, 206 22, 23, 24, 93, 126 Kan'iyasan
132, 136, 145, 151, 163 186, 192, 204
225, 230 Egmeg
234, 238, 239 Kan'n Egayao
187 Kan'npur
215, 263 Kan'nej E'th
7, 201 Kattar E'y 67, 86, 87, 111, 118, 194 Kantar
58, 218 E'yaruv
72, 80, 94, 163, 169 Kandapp E'lay 219 Kapp (Kalp-vidhi Ya Maryada)
70 219 Kapp (Kalp-Devalok) 62, 74, 89, 122 2, 10, 12, 44, 58, 59, 62, 66
149, 156, 179, 268, 274 68, 73, 74, 77, 79, 80, 81, 83 / Kalp (Klup) 58, 95, 235, 261, 264
X
52
Ev

Page #261:
---------------------------
## 220]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Word Index
Karma
81
Kampillapur
175
Kambal
107
22
94
137
Kay Kayath / Kar (Kri) Kar (Kar) Karag Karan Karanya Karay Karis Kaland Kalam Kalasay Kalay Kalav Kalus Kallan Kallakalin Kavad Kavil Kavijal Kavoy Kansapai / Kah Kaha Kahi Kam Kamadeva
Sutra Word
Sutra 94 Kayam
95,246 46,51,72,73,74,76,84 Kay
53,70, 107, 109 85, 193, 218 Kar
165 Karan 78 Kariya
133, 136 95,111,136 Kal 1, 2, 3,9,56,66,73,75,76, 111
89, 116, 122, 126, 173, 10,16-42,99, 132, 225
252, 255, 257,268 101 Kalag 197 Kas
152 46, 48,59, 107,206 Kasai 111 Kinchi
172 184 Kinn (Kinva) 197 Kinn (Kin Nam) 94 /Kitt
70 35 Kittan
216, 184 Kitti
36 Kiliinj 206 Kis 172 Kida
48 66,76,175, 189,192 Kukud
219 184, 235,242,243 Kukkuy
94 Kunkuma 94 Kucchi 219 Kudil 219 Kudumb
5,66,68,238 235 Kundakoliy 2,165-172,174, 175, 60,86, 156, 209
177, 179 10,114,115, 174,190,214 Kudal 218 Kumar
256 48 Kumbhakar
181, 184, 193, 194, 92,93,95-112,114,115,
200,221 116,119,121,122,123 Kumbha
101 125,174 Kul
66,69,77,78 .
57 Kuviy (Kupya)
251
1
94
94
Kamabhog , 

Page #262:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[221
Case
24
Kesi
92
Word Sutra Word
Sutra Kuviya (Kupi)
95 Khay
74,90,253 Kusum
30,95 Khalu 2,3,10,12,44,58,66,73, 46,47
79,81,83,86,92, 95, 111, Kuniya
114, 124 Kei 68,200 Khaim
58 Kenai 111 Khinkhinia
111, 187 Kevali 187 Khinkhini
168 Kevi 138 Khipp
59,206 51 Khir 246 /Khubham
95,101,107,111,222 Kohay
94,124 Khur (Kshur) Kotthia 94 Khur (Khur)
206, 219, Kodi 4,17,92, 125, 150, 157, Khet
19,49,50,74,253 160,163,165,182, 204 Khom
28 232, 234,238,239,269, 273 / Gachchha 10,58,80,90,204, 214,220 Koḍubia
12,59,206, 207 Gan Kodha 152 Gani
117,175 Korent 10 Gandha
22, 26 Kolgharīya 234, 239,242,243 Gandhavva
111 Kolal
195, 196,198,200 /Gam (Gam) Kolahal 136,137,145 Gam (Gam-Jivanakram)
274 Kollay
8,66,69,79,80 Gaman Kosi 101 Gay
11, 111 Khaya 206 Gall
94 Khaovasam
74, 253 Gavala Khajjaman
218 Gahiya Khajjaya
34 Gay
127, 130,133,136, 227 94 Gahavaī
2-6,8,10,11,12,13, / Khand (Khandha Dhatu)
58, 92, 125, 150, 157, 165, Khand (Khandha)
232, 269, 273 Khandakhanḍin
95,99 Gahavaīni 238,239, 240, 242,243, Khandha
244, 246, 248, 249, 254, Khambh 136, 145,154
255, 256, 257, 260, 261 /Kham 86,87,111 Ginha (Genha)
127,168,219, 225 Khaman - 77 Giha
10,58,69,114
123
181
95
34
94

Page #263:
---------------------------
##  [Upasakadasangasutra]

**Gotra**
101 Goyam
95 218 Gosal

**Shabda**
Sutrashabda Gihi
12, 58, 61, 83, 204, 274 Chauvviha Giva
107, 109 Chakk Guttha
94 Chakkaval Guna
66, 76, 216, 220, 272 Chakkhu Gunasil
231 Chanchal Guru
58, 142 Chand Gulgul
101 Chandikiya Gulia
95 Chandan 4, 18, 37, 92, 94, 150, 157 Champa
1, 92 165, 182, 232, 234, 269, 273 Chaya (Chy)
123 Gona 206, 242, 243, 244 Chaya (Chyav, Chyavan)
90, 123 76 Chalan 62, 76, 87, 123, 259, 261, 266 Chaudasya Gor
_76 Chaurant 168, 169, 185, 215-222 Char
10 Ghad
27 /Chal
95, 101, 111 Dhadya 184 Chav
101 Ghadi 94 Chindh
95 206 /Chint
136, 163, 230 Ghantika
206 Chinta
34, 37 Chintiya Ghar
77, 78, Chulani Piya 125-138, 140, 142, 244 Ghaye 127, 130, 132, 133, 136, 145, 146
146, 147, 148, 149, 156, Ghay
241
163, 164, 225 . 241 Chull
74, 253 Ghodaya
94 Chullasayag
158, 160, 162, 163 76, 107 Chullasayay
2, 157, 159, 161, Ch 14-43, 54-57, 84, 94 Chulli
94 4, 17, 18, 21, 43, 49, 62 Cheiya 1, 6, 10, 86, 92, 124, 231 89, 122, 141, 156, 164, 268
269, 273 274 Chedia
208 Chauth
71, 142 Chev
81, 84, 83, 95, 102, 109, Chauppaya
18, 49
129, 133, 200, 248 Chaurans
76 Choddas
66, 179, 223, 245, 272 Chaurasiya 94, 253, 255, 257 Chha
92, 150, 157, 160, 163, 239
Ghanta
275
Ghay
Guttha
Ghor
Chau

Page #264:
---------------------------
10.
Janga
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[ 223 words Sutra words
Sutra 71,77 Jagariy
66,73, 252
95 / Jan (Jna) 44-57,74,83,138, Chhat
239,253 Chhavi
45 Jan (Yan) 59,61, 206, 208, 211 Chhar 197 Janay
187 Chhijjaman
218 Janu Chidd 238 Januy
95 / Chind 89,122, 268 Jay
64,65,72,73, 81, 101, Chey (Chek)
219
206 213, 236, 251, 271 Chey (Chhed) 45 Jal
59,206 : 10,58,78,114,187,211 Jav 2,6,5-12,44, 58-66,68, Jai 2,83,85,91, 138, 200
71,72,73,75,79,81, 94
83-87,89, 253 Jadil
107 Jin
73,85, 187 Jan 51,79,80,88,120, 178 Jibba
94 212,222, 237,267 Jimi Janan
246 Jiyasattu
3,9,92, 124, 150, 157, Janani 133,136
165,180, 269, 273 Janvay 88,120, 178,212, 22, 237, 267 Jiv
13,14,15,44,64,171, Jant
213, 218, 263 Jamga-Samaga
- 152 Jiviy
57,95,102,107,111,116, Jamal
94,107
127, 133, 151, 200, 238 Jambuddiv - 111 Jih
95,107 2,92,124,231,269,273,276 Jui
111, 169 Jambunay
206 Jug (Yug-Manavishesha) Jambulya । 184 Jug (Yug-Yupa)
206 Jamm 111 Jugavant
219 / Jal 66,73,189 Jutt
101, 206 Jah 94 Juyal
28,107 2,9,12,43-57,66,79,92, Juvanay
206 95, 102, 127 Je?
66-69,76,92,127,130, Jaharih
261
136,145,151,154,230,245, Jaheyam 12, 210
272, 294 81 Jemana 66,73, 252 Joiya
206
Jamboo
78
Jaha
Ja
40
/ Jagar 

Page #265:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**224]**
Word Joṇiya
Jott
Joyaṇ
Jhāṇ
Jhiyā
Jhūsir
Jhūs
Jhūsaṇ
Jhūsiy
Ṭhav
Ṭhāṇ
Ṭhi'i
Ṭhiy
Ṇaṁ
Taṁ
Ṇāṇ
Ṇhāy
Hāviy
Taiy
Tao (tataḥ)
Tao (tray)
Takkar
Tacch (tathya) Tacch (trutiya)
Tajja
Tatt
Taththa (trasta) Taththa (tatra)
Tant
Tam
Tambol
Sūtra
Śabda
117 Tayā
206
74, 83, 253
77, 96, 97, 98
Tarūṇ
Tal
Talavar
77 Talāya
94
Taliy
89, 122, 268
57, 73
252, 259
66, 68, 172, 245, 272 84, 85, 86, 87, 146, 261, 264
62, 89, 122, 149, 156
164, 268, 274 74, 208, 253, 255, 257 2-8, 10-43, 45-74, 77-90 187, 188, 193, 218, 253
10, 190, 208
94
10, 12, 13, 47-57, 74,
109, 187, 227 77, 124
Tav
Tavassī
Tasiy
Tah
8, 51, 62, 122, 125, 181 184, 193, 232, 273
101, 222
Tahṁ
Tahā
Tahiy
Tā
Tāl
Tāv
Ti
Tikkh Tikkhutto
118
127, 130, 133 Tiṇṭṭhe
47
Tittīr
Tirikkh
70, 85, 188, 218, 220 71, 97, 98, 104, 129, 132 135, 136, 140, 229, 230
Tiriy
Tivāliya
200
Tivīh
76
Tivva
256 Tīya
Tīra (tīra) Tīra (tīra)
Tuccha
218 Tuṭṭha 42 Tumṁ
[ Upāsakadaśāṅgasūtra
Sūtra
14-43, 45-57
219
102, 105
12
51
240
72, 76, 84, 85, 266
76
256
66, 67, 87, 118, 135,
141, 176, 260, 265
12
9, 12, 79, 92, 125, 136 85, 220, 261
73 200
73, 117, 175
10, 58, 81, 83, 99, 102, 105, 107, 109, 119, 190, 208
102, 105, 107, 109 10, 58, 81, 83, 102, 105 107, 109, 119, 190, 208
62
219
117
50
99
13, 14, 15
48 187
70
218
51
12
58, 95, 107, 133, 171, 200, 255

Page #266:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Word List ]
Word
Turakk
Tull
Sani
Ten
Tey
Teras
Telokk
Tell
Thanay
Thimiy
Thulga Dakkhin
Dacch
Dand
Dant
Dantavanam
Dabbh
Darisanijj
Darisi
Dalay
Davaggi
Das
Dansan
Dansanijj
Dasam
Dah
Da
Daada
Danav
Dam
Dar
Davanaya
Daliya
Ditth
Ditth
Suttra Shabd 32 Dinna
47
Ditt
96, 215, 247 Dippaman
47
Divas
94 Divva
Disa
233, 235
187 Disi
25 Disi
94
Div
7 Du
Dukkar
74, 253 Dukkh
107 Dupay
13, 14, 15, 45, 46, 47
43, 52, 200, 218
23, 51, 94, 101
23
69, 111
51
2, 4, 18, 92
187, 188, 193, 218
111
187
195 Duh
273, 276
Duppouliya
Durant
Durahiyas
Duruha
Duvalas
Duvih
Dev
94 Devatt
Devay
51
40
11, 146,
78, 93, 214
Duipalas
Duipalasay
51 Devanuppiy
58
Deviddi
107, 109 111 Devind
10, 30 Devi
16, 46, 48 Des
Docch
Doniy
Dhann (Dhanya)
Dhann (Dhanya)
[ 225
Suttra
184
76, 273
94
277
101, 107, 111, 169
20, 21, 61, 119
50
3, 7
111
13, 14, 15, 49, 51
133, 136
227, 230
49
51
95
100
61, 69, 109, 211
12, 58, 211, 234, 238, 239
13, 14, 15, 51 95, 102, 108, 127 58, 78, 86 3, 10 90, 111, 116, 123, 128 62, 89, 122, 149, 268, 274
58, 133, 136
12, 68, 77, 79, 95.
156, 204 169, 171
111
111
54
71, 97, 104, 108
235
49
111

Page #267:
---------------------------


Page #268:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary of Terms ]
Word
nipfanda
nibbachcha
nimijja
nimmiya
niyaga
niyattaṇa
niyaya
niravasesa
nillancchana
nillaliya
nivuddaṇa
nivvana
nisanta
nissamma
nisa
nisama
nihana
niṇe
niya
nila
nuṇam
t
neyavva
neraiya
neraiyatta
no
paitthiya
ivisiya
paunja
pautta
pauma
pauliya
paoga
suttra word 219 pakkelaya
200
197 pakkheva
206 pagasa
8
19
168, 169, 171, 199, 200
218
218
58
156
pacchakkhaṇa
51 paccanubhavamaṇi
95 pacchatthima
12, 61, 80, 137, 155, 204, 210
94
79
4, 17, 12, 125, 160, 165
182, 204, 232, 269, 273
102, 136, 160, 163,
195, 230
77, 78
95, 99, 116, 127, 138
116, 175, 192
pakkhiva
101
206
paggha
pagghahiya
255, 261
4, 17, 92, 125, 160
pacchakkha
~ pacchappina
/ paccoroha
pacossakka
paccha
pacchima
pajjatta
pajjuvaasa
panca
pancama
pattaṇa
94 pattaya
274 padala
255
255, 257
12, 58, 62, 84, 85, 95, 101
pancanuvvaiya
panjali
paḍiucchareyaavva
paḍikkant
paḍikkamma
paḍigaya
paḍiggaha
paḍiggaha
paḍiccha
[ 227
suttra
30
paḍicchhiya
51 paḍijagaramaṇi
47
● paḍinikkhamma
200
152, 154, 156
54
95, 107
106
72
13, 43, 235
66, 95
6
74, 253 206, 207 208
101, 107, 111, 256
197 57, 73, 79, 109, 252, 259,261
79
9, 10, 59, 114, 174
6, 19, 20, 42, 44-57, 74, 83 71, 157 12, 58, 204, 210, 211
111, 208
218 166, 172
218
116
89, 122, 268
86
61, 75, 111, 119, 172
58 79
102, 105
12,58
238
10, 58, 69, 78, 86 

Page #269:
---------------------------
##  [228]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Words
Sutra 95, 97, 132, 133, 138
218 74, 253, 255
111 12, 58, 68
219 69, 77
55 5, 49, 101
43
Sutra Word Padiniggaccha
79 Patthiya Padiniyatta
114 Panth / Padidamse
86 Pabha / Padiniggaccha
12 Pabhasemana / Padipuccha
68 Pabhii Padipunna
01 Pabhu Padibanddha
51 / Pamajya Padibandha
12, 77, 210 Pamajjiya / Padibhaṇa
156 Pamana Padima
70, 71, 112, 148, 179 Pamaya Padiayakkhiya
47, 252, 259 Pamha Padirūva
111 Payatta Padirūvag
47 Payana Padilaabhemana
58, 64, 65 Payahina / Padilehe
66, 69, 77 Par Padilehiya
55 Parakkama / Padivajja
12, 58, 61, 86, 87 Padivatti
111 Param Padivanna
111, 168, 187, 192, 218 Paraloka / Padisuṇa 87, 118, 176, 194, 205 / Parikaha Paduppanna
187 Parikkhitta Padocchana
218 Parikinna Padhama
70, 77, 91, 121, 250 Parigaya Padhamaya
13 Pariggahiya Panarasama
75 / Pariccaya / Paniha
192 Parijana Panihana
53 / Parijana Panṇatta
2, 51, 62, 89, 91 / Paritthave Panṇatti
66, 69, 92, 141 Parinaddha Panṇaras
51 Parinama Panṇarasama
66, 179, 223 Paritant Panṇavana
222 Paribhoga / Panṇava
264 Parimana 89, 121, 122, 169, 170, 171 Pariyaga / Pattiya
12 Pariyaya
43 10, 190 44, 48, 56, 57 73, 168, 169, 170, 198, 199, 200
181 57
203
10, 114
208 107, 109, 190, 206
48, 58 95, 152
215 200
101, 222 22, 51, 52
16-42, 49 89, 122, 272
62, 275
]

Page #270:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[229
58 114
43
44
Pavitttha
Sutra word
Sutra / Pariyana
247 Pamokkha
172, 233, 235 Pariloyana
78 Pay
10, 81, 94, 102 Piravvajiya 95 Paychchitta
261, 265 / Parivasa
3, 8, 125, 181 Paypunchan Parivuda
208 / Pare Parisa 9, 11, 75, 125, 189, 235 Paranagh
258 Palanga Parihiya
111, 187 / Pale / Paruva
264 Pav Paro
261 Pavayana 12, 101, 111, 210, 222 Palanva
101 Pavesa
10, 114, 190, 208 Paliovam
62, 89, 122, 149, 156, / Pas 74, 80, 81, 83, 97, 99, 101, 164, 268, 274
104, 105, 109, 111 Pavana
101 Pasanda Pavar 61, 111, 206, 208, 211 Pasavana
55, 69 101 Pasaaiya
111 Pavitthar
4, 17, 92, 125 Pasadhiya Pavvaiya
12, 210 Paahana / Pavvay (Pra-vraj)
12, 62 Pi
98, 104, 108, 129, 132 Pavvay (Parvat) 74, 253 Picchha
219 Pasattha 206 Pitttha
101 Pasanna 240 Pidaga
117, 175 Pasansa 44 Pivaasiya
95, 246 Pasina
58, 119, 175, 177, 219 Pisaya 94, 96, 97, 99, 101, 116 Pasevaa 94 Pidhaya
184 Pah
160 Pida
58, 187, 193, 194, 216, 220,
62 / Pauna
62, 89, 122, 268 Pilana / Paubhava 81, 167, 186, 192, 224 Puccha (Puccha)
101, 219 Paubbhūya
61, 93, 111, 119 / Puccha (Pracchh) 50, 119, 163, 177 Padihariya 187, 188, 193, 194, 220, Puccha
125 221 Pucchiya
181 Pana (Pana) 58, 73, 79, 86, 252, 259 Puncha
94 Pana (Prana)
13, 45 Punchan Paniya
41 Punja
Pahu
221
58 

Page #271:
---------------------------
[230]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Word
Pud
Pudga
Pudhavi
273
94
Punai Punna (Punya) Punna (Purna) Punnabhadda
Puppha Pura Puro  Puratthima Purvara Purisa
Purissakkara
Sutra Word
Sutra 94 Posanaya
94 Posah 55, 66,69,79,80,92, 95 94,166,168,253,255 Posahya
69,111, 125 214 Phagguni 117, 175 Farus 95, 246 Phala
24, 111 34,107 Phalga 58, 187, 193, 194, 216, 220 1,92 Phala
94 66,67,130,136 /Phas
70,89, 122, 268 30,66 Phasuessanijja
94 Phasuya 66,68,78, 101 Phugga Phugga  _74,83,89, 122, 149, 253 Phutta
94 Phud 59, 136, 138,139, 146, 154 Phodi
163 Bandha 73, 168, 169, 170, 171, Bhambhayari
111, 125 198,199 Bhambche
76 76 Bala
18,73,168,218 66,73,93, 116, 126 Bahiya
3,7,54, 63,88 58,197 Bahu
4,12,62,68,89 187,218 Bahuya
66 Bahula 165 Bah
94 33 Biya
77 181 Bibhaccha 44,45 Buddaman 54 Buddhi
136 56 Be 54 Bhai
94 Bhakkha 242, 243 Bhakkhanaya
51 77 Bhagavan 1,10,11,44,60,62,63,73 180, 181, 184, 190, 193 204, 208,212,214, 222 Bhagga
95, 146
Pulga
Puvva
Puvvin Puya
8
Purana
157
94
218
Pusa Pejja Pem Peyala Pesavana Pehanaya Poggala Potta Poyaya Porisi Polasapura
235
184
34

Page #272:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Word List ]
Word / Page Number
Bhajjia
Bhaṇ
Bhaṇḍ
Bhaṇḍaga
Bhaya
Bharia
Bhatta
Bhadda (name of Kamadeva's wife) Bhadda (name of the mother of the Chulani father)
Bhava
Bhava
Bhavakkhaya
Bhasell
Bhaḍi
Bhaṇiyavva
Bhaya
Bhayaṇ
Bharah
Bharia
Bhaava
Bhaavemaṇ
Bhaas
Bhiuḍi
Bhikkha
Bhikkhayariya
Bhijjaman
Bhind
Bhima
Bhiy
Bhugga
Sutra Word
Bhujjo
142 Bhuñjamaṇ
240
95, 102, 107, 127, 132, 133
102, 153, 229, 230, 248, 254
195, 196, 198, 200
214
45, 73, 79, 86, 122
92
133, 136, 137, 138 256 127, 130, 133, 227, 235
12, 89, 122, 210, 266
90, 123
90, 123
Sajja
Bhoga (member of the king's council) Bhoga (worldly pleasures)
Bhoyaṇ
M (amh)
Maula
Magga
94 Mankhaliputra
51
Bhuṭṭa
Bhumga
Bhumay
Bhumi
230 Mangala
3, 7, 107, 109
Bhuy
Bheya
Manguli 77 Macchariya
111
6, 59, 65, 92, 125, 163
138, 169, 19, 200, 220,
246
66, 76, 179, 181, 223, 245,
266, 272
77, 78, 89
77, 78, 79
118
200
95
228, 256
Majja
Majjaṇ
Majjha
Majjhima
Majjhimay
Maṭṭia
264 Maṭṭha
99 Maḍaha
Maṇḍ
Maṇḍukkia
Maṇ
Maṇi
[ 231
Sutra
111
200, 238, 239, 246
66
94
95
55, 69
5, 107
46
58
210
200, 238, 239
33, 51
58, 66, 73, 83, 136, 140, 170
101
70
Maṇuy
Maṇuss
95 Maṇogaya
168, 169, 171, 188, 192, 214, 216, 218, 221, 222 10
168, 169, 171
56
240
27
10, 69, 111, 114, 190, 208
77, 78, 132, 136
230
197
31
95
37
38
13, 14, 15, 53, 66, 101
206
187
10, 117, 190
66

Page #273:
---------------------------
##  [Upasakadasanga Sutra]
**Sutra 187, 218, 240**

**Matt** 23, 12, 68, 77, 210, 12
**Mans** 117, 6, 111, 238, 136, 142
**Mahei** 57, 73, 242, 259, 256, 30
**Shabda** Sutra Shabda Mant 46
**Mahiy** 101, 246, 254, 260
**Mahuy** Maran 57
**Mahuy** Mall 10
**Ma** Malliya 101
**Madambhiya** 127, 130, 133, 158, 225, 227, Man 240, 244
**Manusa** Massi 107
**Manussaya** Mansu 94
**Maya / Mah (Math)** 200
**Mayi Mah (Mahat)** 101, 107, 111, 138, 151
**Maranantiya** 11, 60, 191, 218 / Mare 
**Mahggh** 10, 114, 190, 208
**Malai** Mahpphal 10
**Mala** Mahall 94
**Maliyaay** Mahakaay 107
**Mas (Masha)** Mahagov 218
**Mas (Mas)** Mahatav 76
**Massiya** Mahaddhammakhi 218
**Mahurya** Mahanijjamay 218
**Micchat** Mahapatta 218
**Miccha** Mahamahan 189, 188, 193, 216, Minj 217, 218
**Mitt** Mahalay 84, 218
**Misimisiyaman** Mahaliya 11
**Mees** Mahavad 218
**Muing** Mahavideh 90, 123, 149, 156, 164, Mukk 179, 230, 268, 272, 274
**Muguns** Mahavima 89, 122, 149
**Mugga** Mahavir 9, 10, 11, 44, 58, 60, 61, Muchchiya 62, 63, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78
**Mund** Mahasatthavaha 218
**Mund** Mahasamudd 218
**Muddagga** Mahasayag 233, 234, 253, 260, 266
**Muddaya** Mahasayaya 2, 232, 236, 246-252
**Mudda** 89, 122, 257, 268
**89, 122, 168**
**39**
**218**
**93, 171, 200**
**181**
**8, 66, 68, 69, 92**
**95**
**197**
**94**
**95**
**94**
**36**
**240, 242**
**12**
**12, 62, 210**
**166**
**172**
**31, 168, 175** 

Page #274:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary of Terms
[233
Word Muddaana Musala Musa Muha
Muhapattī
12
Mūsa Meḍhī Meraga Meh Mehuṇa Mokkha
EE SEEEEEEEEE:
Mōsa
23
Mōha Mōhariya
Yattiya
Sūtra Word
Sūtra 81,83 Ruṭṭha
95, 256 102,105 Rūva 54, 66,80, 94, 96, 97, 99, 14,46
101,103 42,77 Revaī
233,234,235,238,239,240, 77 242, 243, 244, 246, 247, 248, 249 107 / Roe 5 Rog
152, 154, 156 240 Roma
219 101 Rōsa
107 16,235 Lakṣaṇa
95, 111, 206 95,246 Lakkhā
46 Laṭṭhi 246, 260 Laḍaha
52 Ladḍha 10,114,169,170,171,174, 2,5,11,31,51,58,60,66,73
181, 190, 219 20,21 Laṭṭha
10, 114, 174 107 / Lamb (Lamb) 5, 125, 241 Lamb (Lamb)
94,101 47 Lambōdara
101 206 Laliya
101 107, 227 Lavaṇa
74,83, 253 66,73,93, 116, 126 Laghu
59, 206 74, 253, 255 Lāvaiya
219 74, 253, 255 Lihiya
206 206 Luppamāṇa
218 206 Luliya
246 51 Lesa
74 46 Lessā 116 Leh 125 Log
57,90, 123, 187 3, 9, 11, 58,111, 124, 150 Lōḍha
94 231, 232, 241, 259, 262, Lōma
94,95 266, 267 Lōyaṇa
107 7 Lōluyaccuya 74,83, 253, 255, 257 76 Lōluya
240, 242
Yala Yāvi Rajja Rajjug Ratta (Rakta) Ratta (Rātra) Rayaṇa Rayaṇappabhā
Rayaya
Rayayāmaya Rasa
Rahiya Rāisara Rāya Rāyagiha
Ridḍha Risaha

Page #275:
---------------------------
[234]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Sutra
45
Vatta
Vattyay
Vadi
Shabda
Sutra Shabda Lole
102,105 Vayan (Vachan) Loh
107 Vayan (Vadan) Lohiy 107 Var
94,206 94 Varaha
101 Vaikkanta 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 Vavsaes
56 Vaiy 12,58,204,210, 211 / Vavroyay
95,97,102,107,116 Vakkhev 66 Vavhar
5,47 Vaggura
10, 114, 190 Vas 95, 102, 107, 127, 160, 255, 257 Vachch 94, 111 Vasan
94 Vajj 76 Vasant
117,175 Vajjiy
95 Vah 94 Vahiy
187 Vattaman 179,223,275 /Vhay
243 219 Va
30,34,36,38,58 Vadiy 111 / Vagar
261, 264 Vaddhavay 5,125 Vagaran
175, 261 92, 273 Vanarasi
124, 125, 150 Van 51,157,165,180 Vanijj
51 Vaniya
164, 175,185,192 Vaniggam 3,7,10,66,77, 78,79 Vann 95, Vanigggam
58 Vanno
1,3 Vadi Vanniga 116 Vay (Vat)
195,200 Vannavas
94 Vay (Vad) Vattavvay 92,165,230 Vayas
219 Vath 28,58,77,114 Varay
184 Vathu (Shakvishesh)
38 Vas (Varsha)
62,89,90,111,123 Vathu (Vastu)
19,49 Vas (Vas) /Vand 10,58,62,77,81,83,86 Vasadhar
74 /Vam
214 Vasahar Vay (Pad) 88, 120, 178, 212, 222,237,267 Vasi Vay (Vrat)
66,89,95, 272 Vahan Vay (Vraj) 4,18,92,125,150, 157, Vahi
255, 257 165,182, 232,269, 273 Vi 5,58,66,84,89,94,104,105 Vay (Vachas)
13, 14, 15,53 Viigichchha / Vay (Vad) 2,12,44,58,59 Viinn
246
219
253
]
Page #276:
---------------------------
[235
Appendix 1: Glossary] Word
Sutra Word Vijjiya
227 / Vihar Viul
66,72,76,200 / Viuvva 94, 101, 107, 111, 116 Vihar Vikadman
246, 254,260 / Vikkhir
200 Vihi Vigay
94,95 Viriy Vidhay
238 Vis Vinay 67,87,118, 176, 205, 262 Visai Vinassaman
218 / Vucch Viniggay
. 94 Vuddi Vinicchiy
181 Vinnavana
222 Vutt Vinnaan
219 Veg Vitti
58, 184 Vegachch Viderisan
146 / Vedhe Videh
90,123, 149, 156,164 Veni / Viparinaame
101,111, 222 Veyan / Vipper
160, 163 Veyana / Vippajah
101, 107, 111 Veraman Vippan? Vimala
101 Vehas Vimaan 62,89, 122, 149, 156, 164, Vocchey
179,230, 268,272, 274 Sai Viyad
107 Saiy
206 Sakans Viraiy
111 Sakk Viruddha
47 Sakka Viluppaman
218 / Sakkare Vilevan
29 Sagad Vivar
238 Sagg Vivaad
219 Sankapp
48 Sankha Vis
51,107,109, 238,239 Sankiy Visan
219 Sankh Visujjaman
74 Sankhavan
Sutra 6,10,63, 64, 65, 69,70
73,76,79,88, 92, 96 10,88,120,178,212,222
237, 267 16-42, 235
73 89,122, 168,272
101
218,219 4, 17, 125, 160, 165, 182,
204, 232, 269 86,96,98,103,108
101
95 107,109
107 184
100
EFREE EEPREEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE
45,46, 47,52, 66,95 10,114, 190, 208
102,105
50,53
Viraiy
232, 235
111 111,117,175
Vivah
86,172
114
157

Page #277:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**236]**

**Word** | **Abbreviated** | **Meaning** | **Sutra Reference**
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
शब्द | संखित्त | Concise | 76
संगोवेमाण | संगो | Together | 218, 214, 238, 239
संघ | संघ | Group | 12, 66, 81, 107, 111, 172, 210, 222, 238
संघयण | संघ | Group | 215
संचाय | संच | Accumulation | 51, 56
चिट्ठ | चिट्ठ | To remain | 76, 266
सचित्त | सचित्त | With mind | 256
संजम | संजम | Restraint | 77
संजाय | संजाय | To be born | 52
सज्झाय | सज्झाय | To understand | 76, 94
सं | सं | With | 76, 94, 101, 89, 122, 268
संठाण | संठाण | Structure | 101, 107, 111, 256
संठिय | संठिय | Constructed | 222
सट्ठि | सट्ठि | Sixty | 101, 111, 222
सणियं | सणियं | To be adorned | 85, 220, 261, 264
सण्णवणा | सण्णवणा | To be adorned | 72, 73, 81, 251
संत ( श्रान्त) | संत | Exhausted | 16, 48
संत (सत्) | संत | Good | 12, 58, 76, 101
संतय | संतय | Restraint | 2, 71, 91
संतोसिए | संतोसिए | To be satisfied | 76
सत्त | सत्त | Truth | 238, 239
सत्तम सेह | सत्तम सेह | Best friend | 5, 12
सत्थ | सत्थ | Skill | 133, 136, 137, 138, 146, 147
सत्थवाह | सत्थवाह | Skilled person | 69
सत्थवाही | सत्थवाही | Skilled person | 44
/ संथर | संथर | Gentle | 55, 69, 111, 216
संथव | संथव | Gentle | 69
संथार | संथार | Gentle | 54, 79, 136, 137, 145, 154, 155
संथारय | संथारय | To make gentle | 12, 210
सद्द | सद्द | Sound | 2, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 188, 190
सद्दह | सद्दह | To hear | 59, 66, 206, 242
सद्दालपुत्त | सद्दालपुत्त | Son of the sound | 200, 214, 219, 238, 239, 246
सद्दावे | सद्दावे | To hear | 94
सूत्र | सूत्र | Thread | 7, 8, 66, 69, 79, 80
शब्द | शब्द | Word | 95, 107, 108, 109, 111
सप्प | सप्प | Snake | 218
सप्पह | सप्पह | Snake | 214
सभा | सभा | Assembly | 85, 220, 261
सब्भूय | सब्भूय | Together | 76, 206, 227, 230
सम | सम | Equal | 62, 85, 116, 175, 192, 219
समट्ठ | समट्ठ | Strong | 9, 10, 11, 44, 60, 62, 63, 73, 75, 77, 78
समण | समण | Ascetic | 44, 66, 67, 73, 74
समणोवासग | समणोवासग | Ascetic's follower | 45, 49, 51-56, 59, 62, 68, 69, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85
समणोवासय | समणोवासय | Ascetic's follower | 65
समणोवासिया | समणोवासिया | Ascetic's follower | 90, 123, 149, 156, 164, 179, 230, 268, 272, 274, 277
समत्त | समत्त | Complete | 160
समंता | समंता | All around | 1, 2, 3, 9, 66, 75, 76, 92, 113
समय | समय | Time | 10, 59, 78, 86, 96, 98, 103
समाण | समान | Equal | 136, 154
समायर | समायर | To be absorbed | 44-57
समायरियव्व | समायरियव्व | To be absorbed | 83, 172
समावन्न | समावन्न |
Page #278:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[237
160 187
79,86
125
Word Sutra Word
Sutra Sampāya 187,188,193,218 Savva
5,16-22,86,125,141, Samparivud
214
168,169, 171, 187, 192, / Sampave
218
199, 200, 230, 235 Sampunna
111 Savvo Sampeha
10,66,80, 114, 190, Savvannu 193, 214, 238 Sansara
218 Sambandhi
8 / Saha (Saha)
100, 117 Sambuddha
201 Sahasa Samma 55,70,79,89, 100, 101,117, /Sanhara
122, 268 Sahassapaga Sammatta
44 Sahassambavana
165,180,190,208,212 / Sammane
66 Sahaaiya Saya (Shat)
19,20, 25,74,83, Saim
184,193,194 Saga Saya (Swak) 1,10,58,66,69,114, Sadi
204,256 Samant Sayam (Swayam)
238, 239 Sama Saya
8 Samaaiya Sayapaga
85 Samaniy Sar
51 Sami
127,150,157,165,173, Sarad
178, 235,270, 274 Sarasaras
107,109 Saya Saris
94 Saraiya Sarira 10,76,152,190,208,252,259 Sarakkhamana
218 Sariraga
154 Sala 66,69,79,92,101,107,111 / Sanlava 58 Sali
35,94 Sanlehana 57,73,89,122, 252, 259 Salihipiya
2,273 Samvachchar 66, 179, 223, 245, 272 Savaga
211 Savattiya 238 Savatthi
269, 273 Savatti 238, 239 Savaya
58,92, 165, 235 Samvavahar
235 Sas Samvahaniya 20,21 Sahatthi
218 Samvibhaga
56 Sahassiya
4,18,92,125, 150,157, Samvalliya
101
165, 182, 232, 234,269, 273 Sanvega 73 Sahassi
111
111
 _38
37
152

Page #279:
---------------------------
[238]
[Upasakadasangasutra
Sutra
17,49 12,77, 210, 227,230
73
Shabda Si Sikkag Sikkha Sing Singay Singariy Singhadag Singhaday Sijja / Sijjha
219
12
219
231 66,73,136,154,163, 193,
230,238
40 42
Sipp Sippi Siri Sila Sivananda
Sutra Shabda 111, 175 Suvanna
94 Suha 12,58,204, 210, 211 Suhatthi
219 Suham 206 Suyar 246 Suva 163 Setthi
160 Senay 55,58,187,216 Seniy 90,123, 149,156,164, Sey 230,268,272,274
219 Seh 94 Sogandhiy
5 Soniy 166,168,172 Sonda 6, 16,58,59, 60, 61, 65 Solas
240 Soll 66, 89, 95, 151, 179, 223, Sollay 245, 268, 272 Sosanaya
94 Soham 111
72 / Sohe
101,206 Soheman 12,61,80,137, 155, 204, 210 Han
70, 148, 206, 250 10,30,114, 190, 208
168,169, 171 / Hattha
127,130,133,136,151,227
101,102, 105 152, 154, 156
127, 240, 244 130, 133, 151, 158, 225, 227
Sidhu
Sil
Sis Siha Sukka Sujay / Sun
62,74,89, 122, 149, 156, 164,179,268,274
70
78
Sutta
Suddha
95,97,102,104,107,111, 113, 127, 129, 132,133,
135,138,140,144 12,59,61,81, 119, 174,
204, 210, 263
Sundari Supp
64
Subha
200
Suy Surahi Sura Suradev Suruv Sulddha
74, 253 /Han
277 Hanuy
26 Hanta 240,244 Hattha 150-156,163 Hatthi
6,133 Hal
111 Havvam
83,116, 175, 192
94, 219 101, 103, 104, 105, 107
19,94 86,111,188

Page #280:
---------------------------
Appendix 1: Glossary]
[239
HET
Word  Haar
Haas
Himavant Hiyay Hirann
Sutra Word 111  Hiri
95  Hinsa 74, 253  Hiin
81, 204, 263  Heu 4,17, 49, 92, 125, 150, 157, / Ho 160,163, 165, 182, 204, 232, 234,235, 238,239,269,273
95, 256
175, 219 1,3-7,92, 125, 183, 184,
233, 234,241 

Page #281:
---------------------------
Appendix 2: List of Books Used in the Context of Translation, Commentary, Introduction, etc.
Anuyogadwar Sutra Abhidhanarājendra Kośa Aṣṭa Prābhṛta: Śrī Kundakunda Acārya Aṣṭāṅgahṛdayam, Saṭīkam
[Ṛṣikalpaśrīvāgbhaṭa Praṇītam, Vidvadvara Śrīmadaruṇadatta Kṛtā Sarvāṅgasundarākhyā Ṭīkā, Śrīmadācāryamaudgalya Kṛtā Maudgalyaṭippanī Ca, Prakāśaka: Motilal Banarsi Das, Punjab Sanskrit Book Depot, Saidmitha Street, Lahore, San 1933 E.] Angasuttāṇi 3
[Sampādaka: Muni Śrī Nathmalajī] Prakāśaka: Jain Viśvabhārati, Lāḍanū Vikramaābda 2031] Anguttaranikāya Āgama and Tripitaka: Ek Anuśīlana Khaṇḍa 1: Itihāsa and Paramparā
[Lekhaka: Muni Śrī Nagarājajī D. Lit. Prakāśana: Jain Śvetāmbara Terāpanthī Mahāsabhā, 1, Portuguese Church Street, Kolkata-1 Prathama Saṃskaraṇa: San 1969 E.] Acārāṅga-Cūrṇi Āvśyaka-Niyukti THE UTTARADHYAYANA SUTRA [Translated from Prakrit by Hermann Jacobi] OXFORD, at the CLARENDON PRESS, 1895] 

Page #282:
---------------------------
[241
Appendix 2: Bibliography] Uttaradhyayanasutra, Sanskrit Shadow-Word Meaning-Original Meaning,
[Translator: Jain Dharmadiwakar, Jain Agamaratnakar Upadhyay Shri Atmaramji Maharaj Publisher: Jain Shastramala Office, Saidmittha Bazaar, Lahore, VS 1996]
Upasakadashasutra
[Editor: Dr. A.F. Rudolf Hornle Publisher: Bengal Asiatic Society, Calcutta, First Edition: 1890 AD]
Upasakadashasutra
[Editor, Translator: Balbrahmachari Pandit Muni Shri Amolka Rishiji Maharaj Publisher: Raja Bahadur Lala Sukhdevsahay Jwalaprasad Johri, Hyderabad-Secunderabad
Jain Sangh, Hyderabad (South) Virabd 2442-2446] [Shrimud Upasakadashang, Shrimud Abhaydevacharya Vihitavivaranyutam.
Publisher: Agamoday Committee, Mehsana, First Edition: 1929 AD] Upasakadashangasutra Sanskrit-Hindi-Gujarati-Commentary
[Writer: Jain Shastracharya Pujya Shri Ghasilalji Maharaj
Publisher: Shri Shwetamber Stanakwasi Jain Sangh, Karachi, First Edition: 1936 AD] Shri Upasakadashangasutra Sanskrit Shadow-Word Meaning-Meaning with Hindi Language Commentary
[Translator: Jain Dharmadiwakar, Jain Agamaratnakar Acharya Shri Atmaramji Maharaj Publisher: Acharya Shri Atmaram Jain Prakashan Samiti, Ludhiana
First Edition: 1964 AD] Upasakadashang [Translator: Editor: Dr. Jivraj Ghela Bhai Doshi Ahmedabad
Devanagari Script, Gujarati Language] Shri Upasakadashangasutra
[Translator: V. Ghisulal Pitlia Publisher: Shri Akhil Bharatiya Sadhumarg Jain Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh, Sailana (M.P.)
First Edition: Vikram Samvat 2034] 

Page #283:
---------------------------
## 242]
[Upasakadasangasutra Uvvaisuutra
[Editor, Translator: Balabrahmachari Pt. Muni Shri Amolak Rishiji Maharaj Publisher: Raja Bahadur Lala Sukhdevsahay Jwalaprasad Jauhari, Hyderabad, Secunderabad
Jain Sangh, Hyderabad (South) Virabhad 2442-2446] . Shri Uvvaisuutra, Shri Abhaydev Suri Krit Tika and Shri Amritchand Suri Krit Balavabodh Sahit
[Publisher: Shriyukt Rai Dhanpatisingh Bahadur, Jain Book Society, Calcutta] Uvvaiy Sutta
[Translator: Atmarthi Pt. Muni Shri Umeshchandraji Maharaj 'Anu' Publisher: Shri Akhil Bharatiya Sadhumarg Jain Sanskriti Rakshak Sangh, Sailana (Madhya Pradesh),
First Edition: 1962 AD] Uvasgadasaao Mool Ane Shri Abhaydevsuri Virachit Tikanana Anuvaad Sahit [Translator and Publisher: Pt. Bhagavadas Harshchandra, Jainanand Pustakalaya, Gopipura, Surat
First Edition: Vikram Samvat 1992]
Devanagari Lipi, Gujarati Bhasha Kalp Sutra Kumarsambhav Mahakaavya
[Mahakavi Kalidas Virachit] Charak Samhita Chandogya Upanishad
Jayadhvaj
[Author: Gulabchand Nanakchand Seth,
Publisher: Shri Jayadhvaj Prakashan Samiti, 98 Mint Street, Madras-1] Jambudvipaprajnapti Sutra Jivajivabhigam Sutra Jain Agam
[Author: Pt. Shri Dalsukh Malvaniya Publisher: Jain Sanskriti Sanshodhan Mandal, Parshvanath Vidyashram, Hindu Vishvavidyalaya,
Varanasi-5] Jain Agam Sahitya Mein Bharatiya Samaj [Author: Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain, M.A., Ph.D. 

Page #284:
---------------------------
Appendix 2: Bibliography ]
Publisher: Chowkhamba Vidya Bhavan, Varanasi - 1, 1965 ]
Jain Philosophy
[ Author: Prof. Mahendra Kumar Jain Nyayacharya
Publisher: Shri Ganesh Prasad Varni Jain Granthamala Kashi, First Edition: 1955 AD]
Fundamental Principles of Jain Philosophy, Part One
[ Author: Muni Shri Nathmalji
Publisher: Motilal Bengani Charitable Trust, 1/4 C, Khagendra Chatterjee Road, Kashipur, Calcutta - 2, First Edition: VS 2017]
The Original History of Jainism, Part One
[ Author and Director: Acharya Shri Hastimalji Maharaj, Publisher: Jain History Committee, Jaipur (Rajasthan) First Edition: 1971 AD]
Jainendra Siddhanta
[ Ksullak Jainendra Varni
Publisher, Indian Knowledge House, 3620/21 Netaji Subhash Marg, Delhi - 6, First Edition: 1970-73]
Tattvartha Sutra: With Commentary
[ Commentator: Pt. Sukhlalji Sanghvi Publisher: Jain Culture Research Institute,
Taittiriya Upanishad Dashavaikalika - Vritti
Digha Nikaya
[ Sumangalavilasini Commentary ]
Dhammapada Nayadhammakhao
Padmanandipanchavinshatika
Parsvanath Vidya Ashram, Hindi University, Banaras -5, Second Edition: 1952 AD]
Panchatantra
Prajnapan Sutra Pramananyatattvaloka Pravachansaro Dwar
Paiasaddamahannavo Paniniya Ashtadhyayi
[ 243 

Page #285:
---------------------------
## 244]
**Patanjali Yogasutra Prakrit-Sarvasva: Markandeya Prakrit Sahitya**
(Dr. Hiralal Jain)
**History of Prakrit Literature**
[Author: Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain M.A., Ph.D. Publisher: Chaukhambha Vidya Bhavan, Varanasi-1, 1961]
**Brahmavaivarta Puranam, Second Part**
[Publisher: Radhakrishna More, 5, Clive Road, Calcutta, 1955]
**Bhagavati Sutra**
**Bhagavati Sutra: Acharya Abhaydeva Suri-krit Tika**
**Bhavaprakash: Bhava Mishra**
**Bhasha-Vigyan**
[Author: Dr. Bholanath Tiwari Publisher: Kitab Mahal, Allahabad
Third Edition: 1961]
**Majjhimanikaya**
**Manusmriti**
**Mahabharata: First Part (Adi Parva, Sabha Parva)**
**Mahabharata: Third Part (Udyoga Parva, Bhishma Parva)**
**Mahabharata: Fifth Part (Shanti Parva)**
[Translator: Pandit Ramnarayan Dutt Shastri Pandey 'Ram' Publisher: Gita Press, Gorakhpur]
**Madhavanidan**
**Raghuvamsha Mahakavya (Written by Mahakavi Kalidas)**
**Sharangadhar Samhita**
**Shringar Shatak: Bhartrihari**
**Sakadalputra: Shravak**
[Explainer: Shrimaj Jainacharya Pujya Shri Jawaharlalji Maharaj
Publisher: Pujya Shri Hukmichandji Maharaj's Sampraday's Shri Hitechchhu Shravak Mandal, Ratlam, Third Edition: Vikram Samvat 2005]
**Samavayanga: With Translation,
With Appendix**
[Editor: Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
1
[Upasakadasangasutra 

Page #286:
---------------------------
Appendix 2: Bibliography
[245
Publisher: Agam Anuyog Prakashan, Post Box No. 1141 Delhi-7
First Edition: 1966 AD]  Brief Expansion: Kramdishwar Sanskshipt Hindi Shabd Sagar
[Editor: Ramchandra Verma
Publisher: Nagari Pracharini Sabha, Kashi Sixth Edition: 1958 AD] Samyuttanikaya SANSKRIT ENGLISH DICTIONARY
[Sir Monier Monier-Williams, M.A.; K.C.I.E., OXFORD, at the
CLARENDON PRESS) SANSKRIT ENGLISH DICTONARY
[Vaman Shivram Apte, M. A.] Sanskrit-Prakrit Jain Grammar and Lexicon Tradition
[Editor: Muni Shri Dulharajji, Dr. Chaganlalji Shastri, Dr. Premsuman Jain Publisher: Kalugani Birth Centenary Celebration Committee, Chapar (Rajasthan),
1977 AD] Sanskrit-Hindi Dictionary
[Author: Vaman Shivram Apte
Publisher: Motilal Banarsidass, Bangla Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi-7, 1966 AD] Sankhyatattvakaumudi Siddhemashabdanusasan Suttanipata Sushruta Samhita
[Composed by Maharshi Sushruta, with commentary Nibandhasangraha by Shri Dalhanaacharya, with commentary Nyayachandrika by Shri Gayadasacharya on Nidanasthana, published by Pandurang Javji, Nirnayasagar Mudranalaya, 26-28 Kalba Devi Street, Mumbai-2,
Shaka Samvat 1860] Sutra Kritanga Sutra Sutra Kritanga Vritti
Note - Only the details of editing, publication, etc. of the books used have been given, which seemed necessary.
-Editor 

Page #287:
---------------------------
## Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar
**List of Benefactor Members**

**Maha Stambh**
1. Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Chennai
2. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Surana, Secunderabad
3. Shri Pukharajji Shishodia, Byawar
4. Shri Sayermalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore
5. Shri Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg
6. Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia, Chennai
7. Shri Kanwarlalji Baitala, Guwahati
8. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia, Chennai
9. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Chennai
10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia, Chennai
11. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Chennai
12. Shri S. Ratanchandji Chordia, Chennai
13. Shri J. Annarajji Chordia, Chennai
14. Shri S. Sayerchandji Chordia, Chennai
15. Shri R. Shanti Lalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Chennai
16. Shri Siremalji Hirachandji Chordia, Chennai
17. Shri J. Hukumchandji Chordia, Chennai

**Stambh Members**
1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur
2. Shri Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur
3. Shri Tilakchandji Sagarmalji Sancheti, Chennai
4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi
5. Shri R. Prasannachandji Chordia, Chennai
6. Shri Deepchandji Chordia, Chennai
7. Shri Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi
8. Shri Vardhman Industries, Kanpur
9. Shri Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti, Durg

**Patron**
1. Shri Birdichadji Prakashchandji Telesara, Pali
2. Shri Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Motha, Pali
3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta City
4. Shri Sh. Jadawmalji Manakchandji Baitala, Bagalkot
5. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Byawar
6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani, Changatola
7. Shri Deepchandji Chandanmalji Chordia, Chennai
8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changatola
9. Shrimati Sirekunwar Bai, Wife of Late Shri Suganchandji Jhamar, Madurantakam
10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra (KGF)

**Jadan**
11. Shri Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur
12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur
13. Shri Khubchandji Gadiya, Byawar
14. Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinaykia, Byawar
15. Shri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon
16. Shri Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria, Balaghat
17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmichadji Kankaria, Tangla
18. Shri Suganchandji Bokdia, Indore
19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Baitala, Indore
20. Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changatola
21. Shri Sidhkarannji Shikharchandji Baid, Changatola
22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortmalji Pincha, Chennai
23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji Baliya, Ahmedabad
24. Shri Kesharimalji Janwarilalji Telesara, Pali
25. Shri Ratanchandji Uttamchandji Modi, Byawar
26. Shri Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha
27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji Lodha, Dondi Lohara
28. Shri Gunachandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary
29. Shri Moolchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur
30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Chennai
31. Shri Bhanwarlalji Moolchandji Surana, Chennai
32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore
33. Shri Badalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan
34. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer
35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore
36. Shri Bhanwarimalji Chordia, Chennai
37. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gothi, Chennai 

Page #288:
---------------------------
[Member List]
38. Shri Jalmachandji Rikhabchandji Bafna, Agra 39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt, Guwahati 40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Chennai 41. Shri Jadavmalji Suganchandji, Chennai 42. Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Chennai 43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Chennai 44. Shri Loonkaranji Rikhabchandji Lodha, Chennai 45. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji Mehta, Koppal
Associate Members 1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosi, Medtacity 2. Smt. Chaganibai Vinaykia, Byaver 3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahta, Jodhpur 4. Shri Bhanwarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria,
Villipuuram 5. Shri Bhanwarlalji Chopra, Byaver 6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Byaver 7. Shri B. Gajrajji Bokdia, Salem 8. Shri Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali 9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Chennai 10. Shri Rooparajji Jodharajji Mootha, Delhi 11. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur. 12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Loonia, Chandawal 13. Shri Bhanwarlalji Gautamchandji Pagaria, Kushalpura 14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur 15. Shri Moolchandji Parkh, Jodhpur. 16. Shri Sumermalji Medtia, Jodhpur 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur 18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur 19. Shri Badarmalji Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur 20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi Dharm Patni Shri Tarachandji
Gothi, Jodhpur 21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur 22. Shri Ghevarchandji Rooparajji, Jodhpur 23. Shri Bhanwarlalji Amarchandji Surana, Chennai 24. Shri Janvarilalji Amarchandji Kothari, Byaver 25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji, Medtacity 26. Shri Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Byaver 27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilalji Dhariawal, Jodhpur 28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur
. [247 29. Shri Nemichandji Daklia Mehta, Jodhpur 30. Shri Tarachandji Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur 31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur 32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur 33. Shri Suganibai Dharm Patni Shri Mishrilalji Sand,
Jodhpur 34. Shri Bachhrajji Surana, Jodhpur 35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur 36. Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtia, Jodhpur 37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji Golia, Jodhpur 38. Shri Ghevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur 39. Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 41. Shri Okachandji Hemrajji Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana, Chennai 43. Shri Ghisulalji Lalchandji Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.)
Jodhpur 45. Shri Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore 47. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mootha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadia, Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratanmalji Sankhla,
Metupalium 50. Shri Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Asakaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 52. Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta, Medtacity 54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishoramalji Parkh, Jodhpur 55. Shri Mangilalji Rekchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji Moolchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 57. Shri Ratnalalji Lakhpatirajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari, Medtacity 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahta, Nagaur 60. Shri Mangilalji Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Piplia Kalan 62. Shri Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi, Bhilai 64. Shri Bheevrajji Baghmar, Kuchera 

Page #289:
---------------------------
[Member List
65. Shri Tilokchandji Prem Prakashji, Ajmer 101. Shri Guddarmalji Champalalji, Gothan 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha Rajnandgaon 102. Shri Tejarajji Kothari, Mangliyawas 67. Shri Ravatmalji Chajed, Bhilai
103. Shri Sampatrajji Chordia, Chennai 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria, Bhilai 104. Shri Amarchandji Chajed, Padu Bari 69. Shri Hiralalji Hastimalji Deshlhara, Bhilai 105. Shri Jugrajji Dhanrajji Barmecha, Chennai 70. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, 106. Shri Pukharajji Naharmalji Lalwani, Chennai Dalli-Rajhara
107. Smt. Kanchandevi and Nirmala Devi, Chennai 71. Shri Champalalji Buddharajji Bafna, Byawar 108. Shri Dulerajji Bhanwarlalji Kothari, Kushalpura 72. Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera 109. Shri Bhanwarlalji Mangilalji Betala, Deh. 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji Karnavat, Kolkata 110. Shri Jivrajji Bhanwarlalji Chordia, Bhairunda 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bhurt, Kolkata 111. Shri Mangilalji Shanti Lalji Runwal, Harsolav 75. Shri Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur
112. Shri Chandmalji Dhanrajji Modi, Ajmer 76. Shri Javrilalji Shanti Lal Surana, Bolaram 113. Shri Ramprasann Gyanprasar Kendra, Chandrapur 77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia
114. Shri Bhurmalji Dulichandji Bokardia, Medtacity 78. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 115. Shri Mohanlalji Dhariawal, Pali. 79. Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 116. Smt. Ramkunwarbai Dharm Patni Shri Chandmalji Lodha, 80. Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji Lodha, Byawar
Bombay 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 117. Shri Mangilalji Uttamchandji Bafna, Bangalore 82. Shri Parsamalji Mahavirchandji Bafna, Gothan 118. Shri Sanchalalji Bafna, Aurangabad 83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji Shrisrimal, Kuchera 119. Shri Bhikhamchandji Manakchandji Khabia, 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairunda (Kudalore) Chennai 85. Shri Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, कुचेरा 120. Smt. Anopkunwar Dharm Patni Shri Champalalji 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Janvrilalji Sanghvi, Kuchera Kothari, Gothan
121. Shri Sohनलालजी सोजतिया, थांवला 87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 122. Shri Champalalji Bhandari, Kolkata 88. Shri Champalal Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur 123. Shri Bhikhamchandji Ganeshmalji Choudhary, Dhullia 89. Shri Pukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur
124. Shri Pukharaji Kishनलालजी तातेड़, सिकन्दराबाद 90. Shri Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore
125. Shri Mishrilalji Sajनलालजी कटारिया, 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore
Sikandarabad 92. Shri Jethmalji Modi, Indore
126. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain Shravak Sangh, 93. Shri Amarchandji Balchandji Modi, Byawar
Bagar Nagar 94. Shri Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhandari, Bangalore 127. Shri Pukharajji Parsamalji Lalwani, Bilada 95. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani Dharm Patni Sw. Shri 128. Shri T. Parsamalji Chordia, Chennai Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan
129. Shri Motilalji Asulalji Bohra & Co., 96. Shri Akhechandji Lunकरणजी भण्डारी, कोलकाता Bangalore 97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon
130. Shri Sampatrajji Surana, Manmad 98. Shri Prakashchandji Jain, Nagaur 99. Shri Kushalchandji Rikhbachandji Surana, Bolaram 100. Shri Laxmichandji Ashok Kumarji Shrisrimal, Kuchera
]
Page #290:
---------------------------
**Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar published Agam-Sutras:**

* **Acharang Sutra** [Two Parts]
* **Upasakadasang Sutra**
* **Jnatadharmakathang Sutra**
* **Antakriddasang Sutra**
* **Anuttaraupapatik Sutra**
* **Sthanang Sutra**
* **Samavayang Sutra**
* **Sutrakritang Sutra**
* **Vipaksutra**
* **Nandi Sutra**
* **Aupapatik Sutra**
* **Vyakhyaprajnapti Sutra** [Four Parts]
* **Rajprashniya Sutra**
* **Prajnapana Sutra** [Three Parts]
* **Prashnavyakaran Sutra**

**Translators and Editors:**

* **Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'**
* **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.)**
* **Pandit Shobhachand Bharill**
* **Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)**
* **Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)**
* **Pandit Hiralal Shastri**
* **Pandit Hiralal Shastri**
* **Shri Chand Surana 'Saras'**
* **Translation: Pandit Roshanlal Shastri**
* **Editing: Pandit Shobhachand Bharill**
* **Translation: Sadhvi Umravkunwar 'Archana'**
* **Editing: Kamala Jain 'Gigi' M.A.**
* **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri**
* **Shri Amarmuni Vanibhushan**
* **Ratnamuni, San. Devkumar Jain**
* **Jainbhushan Gyanmuni**
* **Translation: Muni Pravin Rishi**
* **Editing: Pandit Shobhachand Bharill**
* **Shri Rajendramuni Shastri**
* **Shri Devkumar Jain**
* **Mahasati Pushpavati**
* **Mahasati Suprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)**
* **Dr. Chaganlal Shastri**
* **Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, San. Devkumar Jain**
* **Editing: Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'**
* **Shri Rajendra Muni**
* **Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilokmuni**
* **Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal', Shri Tilokmuni**
* **Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj**
* **Upadhyay Muni Shri Pyarchandji Maharaj**

**Other Agam Sutras:**

* **Uttaraadhyayanasutra**
* **Niryavalikasutra**
* **Dashavaikalikasutra**
* **Aavashyakasutra**
* **Jambudeep Prajnapti Sutra**
* **Anuyogdwar Sutra**
* **Surya Prajnapti, Chandra Prajnapti Sutra**
* **Jivajivaabhigam Sutra** [Two Parts]
* **Nishit Sutra**
* **Trini Chhed Sutras**
* **Shri Kalpasutra (Patrakar)**
* **Shri Antakriddasang Sutra (Patrakar)**

**For more information, contact:**

**Agam Prakashan Samiti**
**Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byawar-305901**

**Mehta Offset, Byawar - 01462 - 253990, 9829251990** 

