Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/002728/1

Page #1:
---------------------------
Uttarapurana
Original
Jain EduAcharya Gunabhadra
Edited-Translated For Private & Personal Ji (Dr.) Pannalal Jain, Sahiniya Varsrary.org |

Page #2:
---------------------------
Acharya Jinsen and Acharya Gunabhadra (9th century) hold a unique position in Indian literature, particularly in Jain Sanskrit literature. Their 'Mahapuraana' is a significant treasure trove of Purana literature, narrating the life stories of sixty-three Shalaka-purushas. The entire text is divided into two parts. The first part is called 'Adipurana', published in two large volumes by the Indian Gyanpeeth. This Adipurana, composed by Acharya Jinsen, illuminates the virtuous deeds of the first Tirthankara Rishabhdev, Bharat and Bahubali, along with the fundamental sources and evolution of Indian culture and history in detail.

The latter part of this Mahapuraana is the 'Uttara Purana', composed by Acharya Gunabhadra. It elaborates on the life stories of the remaining 23 Tirthankaras, 11 Chakravartis, 9 Balabhadra, 9 Narayana, 9 Pratinarayana, and various contemporary kings and Purana-purushas, excluding Tirthankara Adinath and Chakravarti Bharat. The editor of this great work is Dr. (Pandit) Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya, an unparalleled scholar of Jain religion, philosophy, and Sanskrit literature. The book includes Sanskrit original along with Hindi translation, glossary, geographical and personal word indexes. This makes it an indispensable text for researchers, especially those studying Purana and poetic literature from a creative perspective. This new edition of the presented text is dedicated.

Page #3:
---------------------------
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Granthank 14
Acharya Gunabhadra Krit Uttarapurana
[Hindi Anuvad tatha Parisishta adi sahit]
Sampaadan-Anuvad
Dr. (Pan.) Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
Bharatiya Gyanapith
Satavaan Sanskaran: 2000 E. - Mulya: 200 Rupaye

Page #4:
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0171-6
Bharatiya Jnanapith
(Established: Falgun Krishna 6; Veer Ni. San. 2470, Vikram San. 2000, 18 February 1944)
Established by Sahu Shantiprasad Jain in memory of Punyashloka Mata Murtidevi
and supported by his wife Smt. Rama Jain
Murtidevi Jain Granthamala
This Granthamala includes research-based editing and publication of Jain literature in various subjects like Agamic, philosophical, mythological, literary, historical, etc. available in ancient languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil, etc. along with their original and, as far as possible, translations.
Bibliographies of Jain repositories, collections of inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by eminent scholars, and public-welfare Jain literature are also being published in this Granthamala.
Granthamala Editor: (First Edition) Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A.N. Upadhye
Publisher
Bharatiya Jnanapith 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003
Printer: Nagari Printers, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110 032
0 All rights reserved by Bharatiya Jnanapith

Page #5:
---------------------------
Moortidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Grantha No. 14
UTTARPURĀNA
of
ACHARYA GUNABHADRA
(With Hindi Translation, Appendices etc.)
Edited and translated by Dr. (Pt.) Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
QUEROS
BHARATIYA JNANPITH
Seventh Edition: 20000
Price: Rs. 200

Page #6:
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0171-6
BHARATIYA JNANPITH
(Founded on Phalguna Krishna 9; Vira N. Sam. 2470; Vikrama Sam. 2000; 18th Feb. 1944)

MOORTIDEVI JAINA GRANTHAMALA
FOUNDED BY
Sahu Shanti Prasad Jain
In memory of his illustrious mother Smt. Moortidevi
and
promoted by his benevolent wife Smt. Rama Jain
In this Granthamala critically edited Jain agamic, philosophical, puranic, literary, historical and other original texts in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil etc.,
are being published in original form with their translations in modern languages.
Also being published are catalogues of Jain bhandaras, inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by competent scholars and also popular Jain literature.
General Editors: (First Edition) Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A.N. Upadhye
Published by Bharatiya Jnanpith
18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003 Printed at Nagri Printers, Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-110 032
© All Rights Reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith.

Page #7:
---------------------------
## PREFACE to the first Edition

With the publication of this part containing the Uttarapurāņa by Guņabhadra, the Bhāratiya Jñānapītha, Banaras, has to its credit a signal achievement in presenting to the world of scholars the celebrated Sanskrit work, the Mahāpurāņa (MP) or the Trișaști-laksaņa-mahāpurāņa-samgraha (TLMPS), of Jinasena-and-Guņabhadra, in three handy volumes. As compared with the three or four earlier editions of this work, in part or full, with Marathi, Hindi and Kannada translations, this edition is characteristically superior. The Sanskrit text is critically presented after collating it from a number of Mss. important readings from which are duly noted; it is accompanied, just below, by a fluent Hindi praraphrase; there is an exhaustive Introduction in Hindi which not only puts together all information about the authors but also touches some important topics from the work itself; lastly, there is an alphabetical Index of the verses. Thus this edition meets the needs of a pious reader, and goes a great way to satisfy the demands of a critical scholar.

The MP or the TLMPS, as its title indicates, is a great narrative of the ancient times, basically describing the lives of 63 Saläkāpuruşas, namely, 24 Tīrthakaras, 12 Cakravartins, 6 Balabhadras, 9 Nārāyaṇas and 9 Pratinārāyanas recognised and honoured by Jainism. These biographies do not cover only one life of theirs, but present a detailed account of the career of their souls through various earlier births and also indicate their march on the path of religious and spiritual progress. In fact, these lives hold before the religious aspirants various facets of the spiritual career of great many souls that inspire religious confidence in others and lay down spiritual standards for them.

The entire narration is put in the mouth of Gautama and delivered in reply to the enquiry of king Sreņika, both of whom are historical persons. These biographies of souls give many an occasion to the authors to introduce various topics of traditional and conventional character and to embody in the work mythological, religious, dogmatical, sacramental and ritualistic details, and thus make the whole work almost an encyclopedia of Jainism. We get here a graphic description of the evolution of human society along the march of time and of what the great souls of the past did for man in the beginning. The careers of migrating souls bring before one the glim...

Page #8:
---------------------------
**[B]**

The **Mahāpurāṇa** (MP) is a vast repository of knowledge encompassing the entirety of the universe and its associated ideologies. No opportunity is missed to introduce poetic descriptions, ethical sermons, moral exhortations, theoretical details about dreams, town planning, polity, religious dogmas and practices, polemical attacks and refutations, and technical information. This results in narratives enriched by a diverse array of content, showcasing the profound learning and breadth of scholarship possessed by the authors.

The MP stands as a magnificent traditional history, particularly concerning the great heroes of **Sramanic** culture. It presents rich details about the **Kulakaras** like Nābhi, the **Tirthakaras** like Vņşabha, and the **Cakravartins** like Bharata, all with deep interest. Here, we encounter tales about Rāma and Rāvaņa, Kțşņa and Pāndavas, Bāhubali, Brahmadatta, Jivamdhara, Vasu, Nārada, and many other luminaries, holding immense significance for students of comparative mythology.

In describing Bharata's military campaign, the author introduces important geographical information, albeit conventional in many aspects. Descriptions of **Kalpavřksas**, numerals, the three worlds, various mountains, philosophical schools, divisions of knowledge, renunciation, rituals, **samskāras**, penances, meditation, **Samavasaraņa**, etc., have enriched the work with religious and cultural details of great importance. Certain socio-cultural topics warrant careful study and interpretation. Beyond the code of morality for both lay people and ascetics, elaborated throughout the work, we find striking expressions of statecraft and worldly wisdom.

In composing the MP, Jinasena and Guņabhadra drew heavily from canonical tradition and post-canonical texts like the **Tiloyapannatti** of Yativșsabha and the **Vägartha-samgraha** of Kavi Parameșthi. Their work proved so authoritative, magnificent, and exhaustive that its prototypical predecessors were nearly eclipsed. It is unsurprising, therefore, that works like that of Kaviparamesthi were neglected and eventually lost beyond recovery.

The MP has served as a model, if not the sole source, for many subsequent authors like Puşpadanta, Hemacandra, Āsādhara, Cāmundarāja, and the author of the Tamil Śrīpurāna, who composed their works in Apabhramsa, Sanskrit, Kannada, and Tamil. Moreover, numerous Jaina authors are directly or indirectly indebted to this class of works for patterns of details and descriptions, enriching their poems on select themes centered around various heroes, a Tirthamkara, a Cakravartin, or any individual hero of antiquity like Bahubali, Pradyumna, Jivandhara, etc.

Page #9:
---------------------------
The Mahāpurāṇa (MP) is divided into two parts, Adipurāṇa in 47 Parvans and Uttarapurāṇa in 29 Parvans: the entire work thus has 76 Parvans. The total Granthägra comes to about 20 thousand slokas. Of the Adipurāṇa, 42 Parvans and three verses more were composed by Jinasena (about 12 thousand slokas) and the remaining work by his pupil Gunabhadra. The Adipuraṇa covers the biography of the first Tirthakara and first Cakravartin, and the Uttarapurāṇa deals with the lives of the remaining Tirthakaras and other Trişaşti Purusas. The Uttarapurāṇa (about eight thousand ślokas in extent) obviously therefore becomes more enumerative than descriptive.

As an able exponent of Jainism in its manifold aspects and as a successful master of Sanskrit language, Jinasena occupies a unique place in Indian literature by both the quantity and quality of his contributions. Very little is known of his personal life. We get, however, some glimpses of his personality from some of his own poetic expressions at the close of his commentary Jayadhavalā. Almost as a boy he appears to have accepted renunciation, leading a strict celebate life and devoting himself wholly and solely to religious and scholarly life. Though physically weak and not quite handsome, he was strong in his penances and gifted with intelligence, forbearance and modesty. He was an embodiment of knowledge and spiritualism.

As a monk Jinasena was more an institution than an individual. He was a great disciple of a greater teacher, Virasena, whose Jayadhavala commentary he completed in 837 A.D. just as his pupil Gunabhadra completed his Mahāpurāṇa posthumously some years before 897 A.D. He belonged to the ascetic line or family called Pañcastūpanvaya to which belonged Guhanandi, Vṛṣabhanandi, Candrasena, Aryanandi and Virasena. This Pañcastūpānvaya had once its home in the North, in Eastern India; the monks of this line were perhaps the greatest custodians of the knowledge of Karma Siddhanta; and they travelled via Rajaputana and Gujaratas far as Sravana Belgol in the South carrying with them the hereditory learning of the Karma doctrine and pursuing their religious path of severe penances. Virasena and Jinasena attained such a position and eminence that after them the Senänvaya or Senagana came to be mentioned as the family or line of teachers almost replacing the Pañcastūpanvaya.

Jinasena lived in an age of political prosperity and stability as well as academic fertility. The contemporary kings were Jagattunga and Nṛpatunga or Amoghavarsa (815-877 A.D.) of the Raṣṭrakūta dynasty, with their capital at Manyakheta which became a centre of learning. Amoghavarṣa was not only a mighty monarch but also a patron of letters and a man of academic aptitude and literary attainments. A Kannada work, Kavirajamārga, on...

Page #10:
---------------------------
Poetics is attributed to him. He was a great devotee of Jinasena whose ascetic virtues and literary gifts must have captivated his mind. He soon became a devout Jain and renounced the kingdom in preference to religious life as mentioned by him in his Sanskrit work Praśnottara-ratnamālā and as graphically described by his contemporary Mahāvīrācārya in his Ganitasāra-samgraha. (See Jaina Siddhānta Bhāskara IX, and Anekānta V, page 183) His reign was victoriously prosperous and the span of his career pretty long.

After finishing his training in various branches of traditional learning like grammar, poetics, Nyāya etc. under his teachers like Virasena and Jayasena, it seems, Jinasena began his literary career by composing (sometime before 783 A.D.) the Pārśvābhyudaya, a Sanskrit Kāvya, a curio in Sanskrit literature. In this poem he incorporates in every verse one or two lines of the Meghadūta of Kālidāsa in their serial order, the remaining lines being composed by himself. In this way the whole poem of Kálidāsa is subjected to the poetic art known as samasya-purana. Though the stories are basically different, the lines of the Meghadūta get fitted admirably in the Pārsvābhyudaya. Composition by samasyā-pūraña puts a number of restrictions on the poet who undertakes it. Jinasena has achieved it so naturally and skilfully that while reading Pārsvābhyudaya by itself one hardly suspects that it embodies another poem of different theme as well as contexts. The Pārévābhyudaya is a remarkable tribute to Jinasena's mastery over Sanskrit and abilities as a poet. His compliments to Kālidāsa's poem at once ennoble his personality. It is only a merited poet that can admire another poet. On this poem, Professor K.B. Pathak has remarked thus : 'This poem is one of the curiosities of Sanskrit literature. It is at once the product and the mirror of the literary taste of the age. The first place among Indian poets is allotted to Kālidāsa by consent of all. Jinasena, however, claims to be considered a higher genius than the author of Cloudmessenger.' (The Journal of the Bombay branch of the R.A.S., No. XLIX, vol. XVIII, 1892; also his ed. of Kālidāsa's Meghadūta, 2nd ed., Poona 1916, Intro. pp. xxiii etc.)

After completing the Dhavală commentary on the Şațkhandāgama in 72 thousand Granthāgras, Virasena took up the Jayadhavalā commentary on the Kaşāya-prābhịta. He passed away when he had composed just 20 thousand Granthāgras. It was left consequently to his worthy disciple Jinasena to complete that commentary by composing some 40 thousand Grathāgras more (in 837 A.D.). These voluminous commentaries show their depth of learning and their mastery over the entire range of Jainology, especially the Karma Siddhānta. These works contained all that was worth

Page #11:
---------------------------
[
E
]
Knowing this, Jinasena practically absorbed the earlier Sanskrit and Prakrit commentaries. His poetic abilities are evident in his memorable poem, *Pārśvābhyudaya*, and the depth of his wide learning in his *Jayadhavalā*. This twofold ability of Jinasena is seen blooming even more in his *Mahāpurāņa*.

The *Mahāpurāņa*, as a systematic exposition of Jaina traditions and principles, is sufficiently appreciated by specialists; but the literary qualities of this work have not attracted the attention of students of Sanskrit literature to the extent that they deserve. Many sections of the *Mahāpurāņa* present an exquisite specimen of *Kāvya*. Jinasena shows an intelligent acquaintance with the works of his predecessors in the field. He handles Sanskrit language with ease and facility and further invests it with dignity. The *Sahasranāma* shows how fully he has availed himself of both the strength and weakness of Sanskrit language, grammar, and vocabulary. He is a consummate master of versification, and now and then he has attended to even poetic and metrical tricks. His descriptions are exuberantly rich and full of poetic embellishments, both of sense and sound. Professor Pathak was already attracted, though casually, by Jinasena's "richness of fancy, copiousness of imagery, and fluency of verse seen in the *Mahāpurāņa*." It is a sad event in the history of Sanskrit scholarship that Jinasena left this work incomplete. His pupil Guṇabhadra, with much hesitation and after waiting for some time, but as a sacred duty to his teacher, had to complete it, which was later consecrated by Lokasena, a pupil of Guṇabhadra, in 897 A.D. It is a memorable event that Virasena, Jinasena, and Guṇabhadra formed a continued and composite academic personality ushered into existence as if for the purpose of completing three significant works of Indian literature, namely, *Dhavala*, *Jayadhavalā*, and *Mahāpurāņa*, which were too big and profound to be completed in one span of life by any one individual.

Besides completing his teacher's *Mahāpurāņa*, Guṇabhadra composed two other Sanskrit works, the *Atmānuśāsana*, a religious and didactic anthology in 272 verses of different meters, and the *Jinadattacarita*, a poem in nine cantos.

Earnest students of Sanskrit literature in general and of Jaina literature in particular feel highly obliged to Shriman Seth Shānti Prasādji and his accomplished wife Shrimati Ramā Rāniji who founded the Bhāratiya Jnanapith, which is publishing important Prākrit and Sanskrit works. Not minding the cost involved, they are arranging the publication of these works with one great and laudable object: that such gems of ancient Indian literature should not be allowed to be lost in oblivion. Words cannot adequately express their spirit of self-sacrifice and love of learning for its own sake.

Page #12:
---------------------------
[F]
sake. If the Jñanapiṭha Lokodaya Granthamālā aims at educating the public at large, the Jñanapiṭha Murtidevi Jaina Granthamālā respectfully maintains the prestige of ancient Indian learning, especially in its neglected branches. Thus the Jñanapiṭha is truly serving a national cause and a great cultural purpose; and all its publications are enriching our national language Hindi.
Shri Ayodhyāprasad Goyaliya is pushing the activities of the Jñanapitha with zeal and sincerity. Thanks are due to Pt. Pannalal Sahityacharya who prepared this edition of the Mahapurana with a lucid Hindi translation. We have every hope that this edition will give fresh impetus to the study of Mahapurāņa in its various aspects.
July 1954.


H. L. Jain, A. N. Upadhye.

Page #13:
---------------------------
From the Preface of the First Edition

With the publication of the *Uttarapurana* by Acharya Gunabhadra, the *Trishatishataka-lakshana-mahapurana-sangraha*, also known as the *Mahapuraana*, by Jinasena and Gunabhadra, has been published in its entirety in three volumes. The credit for presenting this renowned Sanskrit text in such a beautiful form to the scholarly world goes to the *Bharatiya Jnanapith, Kashi*. Prior to this, three or four editions of this text have been published, including partial or complete translations in Hindi, Marathi, and Kannada. However, the present edition is more useful due to its unique features. Here, the Sanskrit text has been critically established after collating numerous ancient manuscripts, and useful variant readings have been marked. On each page, the Sanskrit original text is accompanied by a running Hindi translation. The detailed Hindi preface includes a collection of all known facts about the authors, and also introduces some important topics of the text. Finally, an index of the verses is also provided in alphabetical order. Thus, this edition will prove equally useful for the self-study of devotees and for critical scholars.

The *Mahapuraana*, as its name suggests, is a great narrative of ancient times. It mainly describes the life stories of the twenty-four Tirthankaras, twelve Chakravartis, nine Balabhadra, nine Narayana, and nine Pratinarayana, these being the great men of the world. Here, not only the life span of these great men is described, but also details of their many previous births are given, which clearly shows the path of their religious and spiritual progress. In reality, these characters present before the devotees various scenes of the spiritual development of many souls, which evoke religious faith and spiritual ideals in the hearts of the readers.

The entire narrative of the *Mahapuraana* has been narrated by Lord Gautama Ganadhara at the request of King Shrenik. Both Gautama Ganadhara and Shrenik are well-known historical figures. In the portrayal of the characters, the authors have had the opportunity to describe many traditional and conventional topics, and they have presented in their work various mythological, religious, theoretical, cultural, and ritualistic details. Thus, this text has become almost an encyclopedia of Jainism. Here we find a vivid portrayal of the development of human society over time, and an introduction to the welfare-oriented activities of the ancient great men. In the descriptions of the births of beings, we see clear glimpses of all the realms and their related beliefs. The skilled poets have not let go of any opportunity to describe poetic narratives, religious discourses, moral teachings, traditional rituals, city planning, politics, etc., as well as the refutation and affirmation of doctrines and ethics, and matters of art. As a result, the narratives have acquired a beautiful variety, which reveals the vast scholarship and traditional profound learning of the authors.

The *Mahapuraana* is a great traditional history of the great men of the Shraman culture. Here, detailed descriptions of the lineage of the Nabhi, the Tirthankaras like Rishabha, the Chakravartis like Bharata, etc., are presented in a very interesting way. Here we find the stories of Rama and Ravana, Krishna and the Pandavas, and many other powerful figures like Bahubali, Brahmadutta, Jivandhara, Vasu, Narada, etc., which are very useful for comparative study of stories.

The poet has given a lot of important geographical information in the context of Bharata's victory march, which, though traditional in many ways, is still useful. With descriptions of the Kalpavriksha, calculations, the three realms, various mountains, visions, knowledge distinctions, detachment, rituals, sacraments, austerities, meditation, Samavasarana, etc., this work is richly endowed with various narratives of religious and cultural significance. Many of these social and cultural topics are worth studying and understanding carefully. In addition to the Shravaka Dharma and Muni Dharma prevalent throughout the text, we also find here many political and social interactions expressed in an impressive manner.

Page #14:
---------------------------
The *Mahapuraana* (Great Purana), which includes the *Uttara-puraana* (Later Purana), was composed by Acharya Jinasena and Gunabhadra, drawing heavily on the *aagamic* tradition and post-canonical works like the *Tiloy-pannash* by Yativrishabha and the *Vaagartha Sangraha* by Kavi Parameshthi. However, their work proved so authoritative, comprehensive, and superior that earlier works on the same subjects were largely eclipsed. It is therefore no surprise that the works of authors like Kavi Parameshthi were neglected and eventually lost to the passage of time.

This *Mahapuraana* served as a direct and sole source, if not, then certainly as an ideal for the works of the Apabhramsha poet Pushpadanta, the Sanskrit poets Hemachandra and Maashaadhara, the Kannada poet Chaamundaaraaya, and the Tamil poet Shri-puraanakara. In addition, Jain authors who wrote about the lives of individual Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, or ancient heroes like Bahubali, Pradyumna, and Jeevandhara, are also indebted to these texts for their descriptive details and expansions.

The *Mahapuraana* is divided into two parts. The first part is called the *Adi-puraana* (First Purana) and contains forty-seven *parvas* (chapters). The second part, the *Uttara-puraana*, contains twenty-nine *parvas*. Thus, the entire *Mahapuraana* comprises seventy-six *parvas* with a total of approximately twenty thousand verses. Forty-two *parvas* of the *Adi-puraana* and three verses of the forty-third *parva*, totaling about twelve thousand verses, are attributed to Acharya Jinasena, while the rest of the text is the work of his disciple, Acharya Gunabhadra. The *Adi-puraana* only narrates the lives of the first Tirthankara and the first Chakravarti. The biographies of the remaining sixty-one *shalaaka* (illustrious) men are recorded in the *Uttara-puraana*. This clearly indicates that the *Uttara-puraana* focuses more on the names and deeds of these individuals than on detailed descriptions, which is evident in its relatively shorter length of about ten thousand verses.

As a skilled interpreter of various aspects of Jainism and a successful artist of the Sanskrit language, Jinasena holds a unique position in Indian literature, both in terms of the authority and quality of his work. We have very little information about his personal life, but his few verses at the end of his commentary on the *Jayadhavala* provide some glimpses into his personality. It seems he took Jain initiation at a very young age and from then on, he remained fully dedicated to the strict observance of celibacy and to religious and literary pursuits. Although he was physically frail and not considered handsome, he was strong in his austerities and gifted with intelligence, patience, humility, and other virtues. He can be considered an embodiment of knowledge and spirituality.

From the perspective of monastic life, Jinasena was not just an individual but an institution in himself. He was a great disciple of the great teacher, Virasena. He completed his commentary on his teacher's *Jayadhavala* in the Saka year 759 (837 CE). Similarly, his disciple Gunabhadra completed his *Mahapuraana* shortly before the Saka year 819 (897 CE), after Jinasena's death. They were members of the *Panchastupaanvaya* monastic order, which also included Guhanandi, Vrishabhanandi, Chandrasena, Aryanandi, and Virasena. This *Panchastupaanvaya* was once centered in northeastern India. It is believed that the monks of this order were the greatest custodians of Jain knowledge about the theory of karma. They traveled through Rajasthan and Gujarat to southern India, reaching Shravanabelagola. Wherever they went, they carried with them their traditional knowledge of karma theory and followed the path of rigorous austerity. Virasena and Jinasena achieved such renown that after their time, their monastic order became more widely known as the *Senaanvaya* or *Senagana* instead of the *Panchastupaanvaya*.

Jinasena's time was an era of political stability, prosperity, and scholarly advancement. His contemporary ruler was the Rashtrakuta king Jagatunga, also known as Amoghavarsha (815-877 CE). His capital was Manyakheta, which was a hub for scholars. Amoghavarsha was not only a powerful emperor but also a patron of literature. He himself was interested in scholarly discussions and possessed literary skills. A Kannada work on poetics, *Kavi-raaj-maarg*, is attributed to him.

Page #15:
---------------------------
## Introduction
1
It is said that they were great devotees of the Jinas and were deeply impressed by the Jinas' austerity and literary qualities. They soon became staunch followers of Jainism. According to the clear mentions in their Sanskrit work 'Prashnottarranmala' and the contemporary work 'Ganitasara Sangraha' by Mahaviracharya, they had renounced their kingdom and embraced a religious life (see Prof. Hiralal Jain 'Rashtrakut King Amoghvarsha's Jain Diksha' Ja. Si. Bhaskar Bha. 9k. 1 and Anekant, year 5, pp. 183-107). Their reign was very victorious and prosperous, and they lived for a long time. Jinasena, having learned grammar, rhetoric, logic, and other traditional subjects from teachers like Vira Sena and Jayasena, began his literary creation, presumably before Saka Samvat 705 (AD 782), with the composition of the Sanskrit poem 'Parsvabhyudaya'. This poem is considered unique in Sanskrit literature. In each of his stanzas, the poet has incorporated one or two lines from Kalidasa's 'Meghaduta', a short poem, and the remaining lines are his own creation. In this way, he has presented the entire 'Meghaduta' in his poem through the poetic skill of problem-solving. Although the plot of both poems is completely different, the lines of 'Meghaduta' fit beautifully and naturally in 'Parsvabhyudaya'. The problem-solving aspect imposes many restrictions on the poet. However, Jinasena has handled his creation with such skill and cleverness that the reader of 'Parsvabhyudaya' never doubts that it also includes a separate poem on a different subject and with a different context. Thus, 'Parsvabhyudaya' is a beautiful testament to Jinasena's mastery of the Sanskrit language and his poetic skill. His praise for Kalidasa's poetry further elevates his personality. Only a great poet can praise another poet in his poetry. Regarding this poem, Professor K.B. Pathak opines that "Parsvabhyudaya is an amazing creation of Sanskrit literature. It is the product and ideal of the literary taste of its time. Kalidasa is unanimously considered to be the highest among Indian poets, yet Jinasena is worthy of being considered a more talented poet than the author of 'Meghaduta'." (Journal, Bombay Branch, Royal Asiatic Society, No. 49, Vol. 18 (1892) and 'Meghaduta' edited by Pathak, 2nd edition, Poona 1916, Introduction, pp. 23 etc.)
1
After completing his commentary on the 'Patkhandagama' in seventy-two thousand 'loka' verses, Vira Sena Swami began writing the 'Jayadhwala' commentary on 'Kapya Prabhrit'. Only twenty thousand 'sloka' verses of this work were completed when he passed away. Therefore, the task of completing the commentary fell upon his worthy disciple Jinasena. He completed this great and sacred text in 838 AD with his forty thousand 'loka' verses. These vast commentaries are indicative of the profound knowledge of their authors and their great scholarship in all aspects of Jainism, especially the theory of karma. These works include all the known facts on the subject and almost all the previous Sanskrit and Prakrit commentaries. Jinasena's poetic skill is evident from his memorable poem 'Parsvabhyudaya', and his vast scholarship is evident from his immortal commentary 'Jayadhwala'. In the 'Mahapuraana', his dual talent is even more evident in a developed form.
From the perspective of Jain Puranas and principles, the 'Mahapuraana' is highly respected by experts; however, Sanskrit scholars have not paid as much attention as they should to its literary qualities. Many sections of the 'Mahapuraana' are excellent examples of Sanskrit poetry. In this field, Jinasena has demonstrated his familiarity with the works of his predecessors. He has used the Sanskrit language in a very simple and natural way, yet he has also elevated it. His 'Sahasranama Stotra' reveals how much he has benefited from both the strengths and weaknesses of the Sanskrit language, grammar, and vocabulary. He is a mature master of poetic structure and has occasionally employed 'Chitra Kavya' (pictorial poetry). His descriptions are extremely rich and filled with verbal and semantic figures of speech. The brilliance of his imagination in his 'Mahapuraana', 


3

Page #16:
---------------------------
The Uttar Purana, part of the Mahapurana, is notable for its abundance of descriptions and the sequential nature of its five creations. These qualities greatly impressed Professor Pathak. It is unfortunate for the history of Sanskrit literature that Jinsen left this work unfinished before passing away. His disciple Gunabhadra, with great hesitation, completed the work in 897 CE, considering it his duty to his guru. Lokasen, Gunabhadra's disciple, then established its reputation. It is a remarkable event that the literary personalities of Virasen, Jinsen, and Gunabhadra are found to be inseparable and well-organized. This extraordinary trinity seems to have incarnated to produce the three treasures of Indian literature: Dhavala, Jayachvala, and Mahapurana. It is impossible for one person to complete such a work in a lifetime.

In addition to completing his guru's work, the Mahapurana, Gunabhadra also composed two other Sanskrit works: 'Atmanushasan', which includes 272 religious and ethical paryokas, and 'Jindaracharit', a narrative poem about the nine sagas.

We are deeply grateful to Shriman Seth Shantiprasadji and his learned wife, Shrimati Rmaraniji, who are passionate about Sanskrit literature, especially Jain literature. They have established the Bharatiya Gyanapith and are publishing important Sanskrit and Prakrit texts. They have no concern for the cost of this publication, their only commendable goal is to ensure that ancient Indian literature does not remain hidden in darkness. Their selfless dedication and love for literature are beyond words. While the 'Gyanapith Lokoday Granthamala' is spreading knowledge among the common people, the 'Gyanapith Murtidevi Jain Prathamala' is respectfully preserving and promoting India's ancient literary treasure, especially its neglected parts. In this way, the Gyanapith is fulfilling a noble national goal and a great cultural purpose. It is also contributing to its own progress.

All publications are in the national language, Hindi. Shri Ayodhyaprasadji Goyali, the minister of the Bharatiya Gyanapith, is diligently working to keep the Gyanapith's work dynamic.

We are grateful to Pandit Pashchalalji Sahityacharya for equipping this edition of the Mahapurana with a Hindi translation.

We have full hope and confidence that this edition will prove to be inspiring for the study and exploration of the Mahapurana from various perspectives.

Heeralal Jain Adinath Neminath Upadhye

Page #17:
---------------------------
## Introduction

I

1. The editorial material of the Uttarapurana has been edited based on the following seven manuscripts:

**'K' Manuscript:** This manuscript was obtained from the Bhandarkar Research Institute, Pune. Its reference number is 318, and its dimensions are 12.45 inches in length and width. Each page contains 11 lines, and each line has 34 to 36 characters. The manuscript is extremely old and worn out. The paper is torn and faded. Its condition suggests that it is very ancient. The date of writing is not mentioned at the end. From the beginning to page 281, the manuscript is torn and the color also changes. From page 282 onwards, new pages have been added and joined. On all sides, there are annotations in small Sanskrit characters. In some places, the serial numbers of the verses are also given. The writing is mostly accurate and legible. It is written in black ink, and the verses are given in red ink. Its code name is 'K'. It does not have the 166th page, and pages 185 to 250 are missing.

**'Kh' Manuscript:** This manuscript was obtained from Jain Siddhant Bhavan, Ara, through the courtesy of Pandit Nemichandraji Jyotishacharya. It has a total of 309 pages. The size of the pages is 12x6 inches. Each page contains 12-13 lines, and each line has 35 to 38 characters. The date of writing is given as 1815 Samvat at the end. The manuscript was completed on the tenth day of the dark fortnight of Margashirsha. Its condition is good, the script is legible, and it is also accurate. Its code name is 'Kh'. It does not contain the author's praise.

**'G' Manuscript:** This manuscript was obtained from the Bhandarkar Research Institute, Pune. It has a total of 412 pages. The size of the pages is 10x5 inches. Each page contains 9 lines, and each line has 30 to 33 characters. The script is accurate and legible. The date of writing is given as 1557 years, Ashadha Krishna 8, Friday, at the end. It is written in black ink. The paper is worn out, and the ink has also faded. Annotations are given in many places. Despite its worn-out condition, it is in good shape. Its code name is 'G'.

**'Gh' Manuscript:** This manuscript was also obtained from the Bhandarkar Research Institute, Pune. It has a total of 313 pages. The size of the pages is 13x7 inches. Each page contains 11 lines, and each line has 45 to 47 characters. The date of writing is not given at the end. The condition of the paper is good, and the script is accurate and legible. It does not appear to be very old. Its code name is 'Gh'.

**'L' Manuscript:** This manuscript was edited and translated by Shriman Pandit Lalaramji Shastri. The original text is given in small characters at the top, and the Hindi translation is given in slightly larger characters below. It was published by the said Shastriji himself. The original text has become inaccurate in many places due to tradition. It is now unavailable. Its code name is 'L'.

**'M' Manuscript:** This manuscript was obtained from the Saraswati of the Atishayakshetra Mahabhirji, through the courtesy of Shriman Pandit Chainsukhdasi Nyayatitham, Jaipur. It has 279 pages. The size of the pages is 12x6 inches. Each page contains...

Page #18:
---------------------------
## The Uttarapurana, a part of the Mahapuraana

**This manuscript of the Uttarapurana, a part of the Mahapuraana, contains 12 lines with 30 to 40 characters per line. The characters are legible, and there are annotations for difficult words in the margins. The book is in good condition, mostly clean, and was written in 1805 on Thursday, the fifth day of the month of Jyeshtha, by Vimalsagar Yati in Sawai Jaipur. Its code name is 'M'.**

**Another copy of the Uttarapurana in Sanskrit manuscript is found in the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, Banaras. From the beginning to the Naminaathpurana, it is based on a printed copy with a translation by Pandit Lalaramji Shastri, and after that, it is based on a handwritten copy. The origin of this copy is unknown due to the transfer of the administrator of the Gyanpeeth. I wrote a letter to Pandit Mahendrakumari Nyayacharya, the former administrator, requesting information about the copy, but received no response. I also discussed it in person, but he said he couldn't remember due to the passage of time. The current administrator is unaware of this matter. Nevertheless, this copy appears to be accurate, and wherever different readings have been taken from other copies, I have mentioned them with the words 'ityapi kvacit'.**

**2. The Uttarapurana is a supplementary part of the Mahapuraana. It contains the stories of 23 Tirthankaras starting with Ajitanath, 11 Chakravartis starting with Sagar, 9 Balabhadra, 9 Narayana, 9 Pratinarayana, and the special individuals who lived during their time. Many of these stories are written in such an engaging way that one doesn't want to leave them unfinished. Although the characters of the 8th, 16th, 22nd, 23rd, and 24th Tirthankaras are written very briefly, the sweetness of the narrative style makes even the brevity enjoyable. This text not only contains mythological stories but also sections that discuss principles like Samyagdarshana, etc., from a philosophical perspective, and topics like creation from a philosophical standpoint.**

**The historical account of the author, Gunabhadracharya, has been given in detail in the introduction of the first part of the Mahapuraana, so it is unnecessary to repeat it here.**

**3. The place of composition of the Uttarapurana - Bankaapur. I had a strong desire to find out where the Uttarapurana was composed, but due to lack of resources, I had no hope of success. One day, Vidya Bhushan Pandit K. Bhujabali Shastri of Moodbigi mentioned in a letter, "If you want to include the place of composition, Bankaapur, in the introduction of the Uttarapurana, I can send it to you." I accepted this kindness of Shastriji as a blessing from heaven and agreed to include the information about Bankaapur in the introduction. As a result, I am presenting the information about Bankaapur that Shastriji sent, in his own words:**

**"Bankaapur is located in the Dharwad district, 15 miles from the Haveri railway station, which is near the Harihar station on the Pune-Bengaluru railway line. This is the holy place where the memorable Acharya Gunabhadra completed the Uttarapurana, a part of the renowned Mahapuraana, in the Saka Samvat 819, under the guidance of his Guru Bhagavajin. Acharya Jin and Gunabhadra are renowned poets in the Jain world, as the literary world knows well. The Mahapuraana is truly a unique work in Sanskrit literature. At the time of the completion of the Uttarapurana, Lokaditya, the worthy son of the Jain hero Bankiya, ruled as a vassal of the glorious and powerful ruler of Vijayanagara, Akalavarsha or Krishna Raja (II). Lokaditya was a great warrior, intelligent, and a conqueror of enemies. His flag bore the symbol of a kite or eagle, and he was the younger brother of Chella Chellaj and the son of Chellaket..."**

Page #19:
---------------------------
## Introduction

(Bankeya) was the son of (…). At that time, the entire (Vanavasi) region was under the rule of Lokaditya. The aforementioned Bankaapur was established by Lokaditya in the name of his revered father, Veer Bankeya, and in those days, it had the fortune of being a prosperous Jain capital. Bankeya was not an ordinary person. He was the guide for the Rashtrakuta king, Nripatunga. Mukula's son was Erkori, Erkori's son was Ghora, and Ghora's son was Bankeya. Bankeya's great-grandfather, Mukula, was the charioteer of Shubhatunga Krishna Raja, his grandfather, Erkori, was the son of Shubhatunga and the charioteer of Dhruvadeva, and his father, Ghora, was the charioteer of Chakri Govinda Raja. This proves that not only Lokaditya and Bankeya, but their forefathers were also skilled in statecraft and great warriors.

Nripatunga had unwavering faith in Bankeya. That is why, in one inscription, Nripatunga has referred to Bankeya as 'Vitatajyotishitasirasivapaarah'. Initially, Bankeya, as the close commander of Nripatunga, won many battles and became a recipient of the king's full grace, as a result of which he was made the ruler of the vast (Vanavasi) province. It was Samant Bankeya who defeated Ganga Raja Rajamalla in a battle and took him captive. In fact, in the grand assembly held to celebrate this victory, when Veer Bankeya was given permission by Nripatunga to ask for any boon, the Jain devotee Bankeya, with trembling voice, requested Maharaja Nripatunga, "Maharaja! I have no worldly desires left. If you wish to give me something, you can grant a land donation for the smooth functioning of the worship and other activities of the holy Jain temple built by me in Kolanur." And that is exactly what was done. This inscription is still available today on a large stone slab in the form of a royal decree. This is just one example of Bankeya's boundless devotion to religion. It is also important to mention in this context that Veer Bankeya's wife, Vijaya, was a great scholar. She composed a poem in Sanskrit. A verse from this poem has been quoted as an example by Shriman Venkatesh Bhim Rao Alur B.A. LL.B. in his beautiful work, 'Karnatakagatavaibhav'. It is natural that Bankeya's worthy son, Lokaditya, also had the same love for religion as his revered father. At the same time, Lokaditya was also significantly influenced by Shri Gunabhadracharya, the author of the 'Uttara Purana'. There is no doubt that due to the pious Lokaditya, Bankaapur became a major center of Jainism at that time. Although Lokaditya was a vassal of the Rashtrakuta kings, it was a characteristic of the Rashtrakuta rule that all their vassals were independent. In the words of Acharya Gunabhadra, Lokaditya was not only a renowned and powerful ruler who extinguished the darkness of enemies, but he was also a noble soul. In those days, there were many Jain temples in Bankaapur. These temples also received donations from the Chalukya and other rulers. As Bankaapur was a major center, Jain Acharyas resided there in large numbers. This is why it was considered a holy place. That is why even a powerful ruler like Ganga Narenash Narasimha came there and performed the Sallekhana Vrat at the feet of the memorable Jain gurus. The Tandadip Hulne built a magnificent Jain temple there, as grand as Kailasa. Not only that, in ancient times, there were not one or two, but five Mahavidyalayas there. These are all things of the past. Let the knowledgeable reader also know about the current state of Bankaapur. There is a dilapidated old fort in a developed and vast field next to the government road. This fort covers 12 acres of land. This fort is under the control of the Bombay government. Currently, the government has set up a dairy farm there. There is also farming in various places. The location of the palace is high and there is a vast field around it. That field is now in the form of fields. These vast fields now produce jowar, bajra, wheat, rice, urad, moong, chana, tuvar, cotton, and groundnuts, etc. The place is very beautiful. In its prosperous days, this place was…

1. "Saraswati va Karnati Vijayangka Jayatyasau. Ya Vaidarmi Giraan Vaasah Kalidasadanantaram."
2. See Jain Monuments in Bombay Province.

Page #20:
---------------------------
The Uttarapurana, part of the Mahapurana, is truly worth seeing. I didn't want to leave for a long time. Inside the fort, there is a beautiful Jinalaya, which the locals call 'Aavat Moos Kamb Galvasti'. Its Hindi meaning is 'the Jain temple with 63 pillars'. I believe this temple must be the famous Shantimandir of the Jains, and its 63 pillars are a reminder of the Trishatishalaka Purushas. The temple is very strong and truly a symbol of the highest art. The polish of the pillars is so beautiful that even after so many years, you can still easily see your reflection in them. The temple is divided into four sections. The sanctum sanctorum is not particularly large. The section in front of it is larger than the sanctum sanctorum, the third section is larger than that, and the final fourth section is the largest. It is so large that hundreds of people can sit comfortably in it. The beautiful artistic sculptures on the ceiling and walls have been destroyed by ruthless destroyers. By looking at this temple, even today, a discerning person can understand the art, economic condition, and religious faith of that time. It is a pity that these ancient and important Jain sites in Bankapore and other places are not only not being restored, but the Jain community is not even aware of them.

4. There are significant differences between the Ramayana stories in the Padmapurana and the Uttarapurana. It is not possible to say with certainty why and when this happened. When people learned that I was editing and translating the Uttarapurana, many scholars wrote letters to me urging me to unravel the mystery of the differences in the Ramayana story. I had also been focusing on this for a long time. However, even after studying, I could not reach a conclusion as to why and since when these differences arose. 

Shri Nathuramji Premi, in his book 'Jain Sahitya aur Itihas', has shed light on the various streams of the Ramayana story in his article 'Padmacharit and Paum Chariu', under the heading 'Various Streams of the Ramayana Story', which throws sufficient light on this subject. For the information of the readers, I consider it appropriate to quote it here in the author's own words:

"The Ramayana is the most popular story in India, and a vast amount of literature has been created on it. This story has been written in its own way by all three ancient sects, Hindus, Buddhists, and Jains, and all three sects consider Rama to be their own great man.

So far, the opinion of most scholars is that this story was first written by Valmiki Muni, and the first epic (Adi Kavya) of Sanskrit is Valmiki Ramayana. After that, this story was briefly written in all the Puranas, including Mahabharata, Brahmapurana, Agnipurana, Vayupurana, etc., with slight variations. Apart from this, many Ramayana texts have been written under the names Adhyatma Ramayana, Anand Ramayana, Adbhut Ramayana. It has also spread in the literature of Java, Sumatra, etc., countries of Greater India, with many adaptations.

In the Adbhut Ramayana, the story of Sita's birth is the most unique. It is written that there was a sage named Gritsamad in Dandakaranya. His wife prayed that Lakshmi be born from my womb. For this, he started keeping milk in a pot every day and chanting mantras over it. One day, Ravana came there and, to conquer the sage, he pierced his body with the tips of his arrows and extracted his blood drop by drop and filled it in the pot. Then he gave that big pot to Mandodari and warned her that this blood is more poisonous than poison. But Mandodari, thinking that her husband did not have true love for her and used to indulge in extramarital affairs all the time, therefore, it is better for me to die now. But due to her yoga, she did not die, but became pregnant. Due to conceiving in the absence of her husband, she started trying to hide it and finally one day she went to Kurukshetra in a plane and buried that womb in the ground and came back. After that, while plowing, that womb-born girl was found by Janakji and he raised her. She is Sita.

Page #21:
---------------------------
## Introduction

The Vishnu Purana (4-5) also mentions that when the Janaka dynasty king, Sirdhvaj, was performing a yagna to be blessed with a son, a daughter named Sita was born from the ploughshare.

Buddhist Jataka texts are very ancient, containing stories of the Buddha's previous lives. According to the Dasaratha Jataka, the king of Kashi had sixteen thousand queens. Of these, the chief queen gave birth to two sons, Rama and Lakshmana, and a daughter, Sita. After the chief queen's death, the second queen, who became the chief queen, gave birth to a son named Bharata. This queen wanted to give the kingdom to her son, usurping the rights of the elder sons. Fearing that she might kill the elder sons, the king ordered them to live in the forest for twelve years. They went to the Himalayas with their sister and built an ashram there. After nine years, Dasaratha died. Then, at the behest of the ministers, Bharata and others went to bring them back, but they refused to return within the stipulated time. Therefore, Bharata placed Rama's sandals on the throne and ruled the kingdom on his behalf. After twelve years, they returned, were crowned, and ruled for sixteen thousand years after marrying Sita. In their previous birth, King Shuddhodana was King Dasaratha, his queen Mahamaya was Rama's mother, Rahulamata was Sita, the Buddha was Ramachandra, his chief disciple Ananda was Bharata, and Sariputra was Lakshmana. The most jarring aspect of this story is Rama's marriage to his sister Sita. However, history reveals that in the Shakya kingdom and households of that era, to maintain the purity of the royal lineage, brothers were married to their sisters. It was a custom. Thus, we see three versions of Rama's story in Hindu and Buddhist literature: one from Valmiki Ramayana, another from the Adbhuta Ramayana, and the third from the Buddhist Jataka.

## Jain Ramayana

Similarly, two versions of the Rama story are found in Jain literature: one from the Paumachariya and Padmacarita, and the other from Gunabhadracharya's Uttarapurana. The story of the Paumachariya or Padmapurana is known to most, as it is the most famous version of the Jain Ramayana. However, the story of the Uttarapurana, which is narrated in its 68th chapter, is not as widely known. Its very brief summary is as follows:

King Dasaratha was the king of Varanasi in the Kashi country. Rama's mother's name was Subala, and Lakshmana's mother's name was Kaikeyi. It is not explicitly mentioned who Bharata and Shatrughna were born to. It simply states, "Kasyam chit devyam" (to some queen). Sita was born to Mandodari, but because the fortune-tellers predicted that she would be a destroyer, Ravana had her placed in a casket and sent to Mithila by Maricha, where she was buried in the ground. By divine providence, she got entangled in the tip of a plough and was found by King Janaka, who raised her as his daughter. When she reached marriageable age, Janaka was worried. He performed a Vedic yagna and, to protect it, invited Rama and Lakshmana. He then married Sita to Rama. Ravana was not invited to the yagna, which made him extremely angry. Later, when Narada praised Sita's beauty, Ravana decided to abduct her.

This story does not mention Kaikeyi's insistence, Rama's exile, or any of the incidents related to Panchavati, Dandaka forest, Jatayu, Shurpanakha, Khara-Dushana, etc. Ravana abducts Sita from the forest of Chitrakoot, near Banaras, and then the Rama-Ravana war takes place in Lanka for her rescue. After killing Ravana, Rama returns victorious and both brothers rule in Banaras. There is no mention of Sita's exception and her subsequent exile. Lakshmana dies of an incurable disease, causing Rama great distress. He crowns Lakshmana's son, Prithvisundar, as king and Sita's son, Ajitangaya, as the crown prince. Then, along with many kings, his queens, including Sita, he takes Jain initiation.

Page #22:
---------------------------
The Uttarapurana, part of the Mahapurana, mentions eight sons of Sita, but not Lava and Kusha. Ravana, the son of Pulatsya, belonged to the lineage of the Vidhyadharas. He was called Ravana because he tormented his enemies. 

As far as I know, this version of the Ramayana in the Uttarapurana is not prevalent in the Svetambara sect. I have read the Ramayana in Acharya Hemchandra's Trishatishalaka Purushacharita. It is completely in line with the story of the Paumachariya. It seems that both the Paumachariya and the Padmacharita were available to Acharya Hemchandra. As mentioned earlier, this story is also widely prevalent in the Digambara sect, and later poets have written their own works by summarizing or elaborating on this story. Nevertheless, the story of the Uttarapurana was not completely neglected. Many poets have used it as a model for their own poetry. For example, take the great poet Pushpadanta. The Ramayana he wrote as part of his Uttarapurana is an imitation of Gunabhadra's story. The same story is found in the Chamundarayapurana.

The story of the Paumachariya and the Padmacharita is largely in the style of Valmiki Ramayana, and the story of the Uttarapurana is in the style of the Janaki-Janma Adbhut Ramayana. The fact that Dasharatha was the king of Banaras is similar to the Buddhist Jataka. Like the Uttarapurana, it also does not include Sita's exile, the birth of Lava and Kusha, etc.

In other words, the two or three traditions of the Ramayana in India have been prevalent in the Jain sect since ancient times. The author of the Paumachariya has said that he is telling the Padmacharita, which was passed down through the tradition of the Acharyas and was written in the form of a list of names. I understand this to mean that the story of Ramachandra was only in the form of a list of names at that time, i.e., it would only have the names of the main characters, their parents, places, and previous births, etc., and not in the form of a developed story. He would have created it in the form of a detailed composition based on that list of names. What Shri Dharmasena Gani has said in the second part of Vasudevahindika also suggests that his Vasudevacharita was also designated according to the order of Ganitanuyoga. Some of it was based on the scriptures and some was based on the tradition of the Acharyas.

When Vimalsuri started writing his work according to the aforementioned list of names, it seems that there must have been some popular Ramayana in front of him, in which Ravana, etc., were described as demons, eaters of flesh and blood, and Kumbhakarna was said to sleep for six months at a time in such a way that even when elephants the size of mountains crushed his limbs, oil was poured into his ears, and drums were beaten, he would not wake up, and when he did wake up, he would swallow anything he found in front of him, including elephants, buffaloes, etc. This role of his indicates that at that time, the Valmiki Ramayana or a Ramayana like it was prevalent, and it contained many absurd, illogical, and unbelievable things, which Vimalsuri tried to make true, logical, and believable. The Jain religion had a framework based on a list of names in front of him, and there was also a story thread that came from the scriptural tradition or the tradition of the Acharyas. He would have created the Paumachariya based on that.

The author of the Uttarapurana came much later than him and Ravishena. Why he did not follow this storyline is a question. It is highly unlikely that he was not aware of these two works, and it is also less likely that he independently molded a popular story like Vimalsuri into the mold of Jainism, because his time is 955 CE, which is very 
1. The Kannada Ramayana of Pampa and the Apabhramsha Ramayana of Svayambhu are based on the Padma Purana. 2. "Naamaavaliyanibaddha aayariyaparampraagayam savvam. Vocchaami paumachariyam ahaanapabbvim samaasena || 8 ||" 3. See Paumachariya Gatha 107 to 115.

Page #23:
---------------------------
## Introduction
51
It is not ancient. We speculate that before Gunabhadra, some other Acharya, similar to Vimalsuri, must have written a Ramayana story in a way that is suitable for Jainism, reliable and independent. This story would have been passed down to Gunabhadra through the Guru Parampara. Gunabhadra's Guru, Jinsen Swami, wrote his Adi Purana based on the prose story of Kavi Parameshwar - 'Kavi Parameshwar Nigadit Gady Katha Matrikam Purodharitam'. And Gunabhadra himself has also sculpted some parts of it. Jinsen Swami has described Kavi Parameshwar or Pavi Parameshthi as the author of the complete Purana called 'Vagarth Sangrah'. Therefore, Muni Suvrat Tirthankar's Cha Sri Gunabhadra must have written it based on the same, which includes the Ramayana story. Chamundaraya has mentioned Kavi Parameshwar.
The point is that the Ramayana stories in Paumachariya and Udhara Purana were created independently and separately, and they have reached us flowing forward. There may also be a difference in the Guru Parampara in these two streams. One tradition adopted one stream and the other adopted the other. In such a situation, Gunabhadra Swami, even though familiar with the Paumachariya stream, may not have followed it because it was not from our Guru Parampara. It is also possible that he found this story better than the plot of Paumachariya.
The Paumachariya was composed in 20 VS. And if Jainism was divided into Digambar and Svetambar sects around 136 VS, as both sects believe, then it must be said that it was from a time when Jainism was undivided. We have not found anything in this text that bears a deep imprint of either sect, from which we can conclude that Vimal Suri belonged to the Anuk sect. Rather, there are some things that go against the Svetambar tradition and some against the Digambar tradition. This suggests that it is a third ideology, between the two.

6. Diversity in other stories
In the 71st Parva, the Bhavantharas of Balaram, Shri Krishna, their eight queens, and Prathman etc. are described. Here, some differences in names, plots etc. are found from Jinsen [Second]'s Harivansh Purana. Similarly, the 75th Parva describes the life of Jeevandhar Swami, but there is a lot of diversity in the plot compared to the Gady Chintamani or Kshatrachudamani written by Acharya Badimasingh. There is diversity in names etc., but there is also diversity in their character portrayal. The reason for this could be that the Vadi Mahine refined the mythological plot to fit into the framework of Kamya. They may have left out the initial chapters. But it is not clear how the difference in names of characters etc. came about.

7. The size of the Mahapurana
What is the size of this Mahapurana text in terms of the number of Anushtup verses? Two mentions are found about this - one is that Gunabhadracharya himself has mentioned 20,000 verses at the end of the text, and the other is that 24,000 verses are mentioned in the same verse reading. Looking at these two mentions, it seems appropriate to decide this once. As a result, the verses of the Mahapurana Part 1 and 2 and Uttar Purana are decided by the following method:

8. The size of Adi Purana Part 1 and 2
Chanda Name | Verse Number | Akshar
------- | -------- | --------
Anushtup | 10412432 | 333184
Harini | 16468 | 1088
Malini | 106460 | 6360

Page #24:
---------------------------
## 12
Uttarapurana, part of the Mahapurana
**Serial Number** | **Chanda Name** | **Shloka Number** | **Akshara**
------- | -------- | -------- | --------
.. | .. | .. | 9484 8.476 19444 4444 81456 8444 33448
.. | .. | .. | - -
.. | .. | .. | 352 1584 220 192 520
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | Sragdhara, Shardulavikridita Upjati, Indravajra, Vasantatilaka, Dodhaka, Drata Vilambita, Upendravajra, Vanshastha, Ruchira, Pushpitaagra, Aparavaktra, Champakamala, Shalini, Mauktikamala, Prithvi, Chamara, Agnata Nama, Praharshini, Bhujangaprayata, Jaladharamala, Swagata, Mandakranta, Mattamaya, Vidyumala, Samanika, Chitrapada, Bhujagasashibhruta, Rukmavati
.. | .. | .. | x50 2446 2440 4444 2444 3460 1x6. 4456
.. | .. | .. | 224
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | 31440
.. | .. | .. | 1488
.. | .. | .. | 220
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | M
.. | .. | .. | 2 0m.
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | - - - NNNNNNNNNNNN Wm Mmm mm09
.. | .. | .. | xxx xxxxxxxxxx
.. | .. | .. | 000
.. | .. | .. | .m
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | Elch
.. | .. | .. | . . .
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | 0
.. | .. | .. | 2440 10x48 1444
.. | .. | .. | 20
.. | .. | .. | 0
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | Upasthita, Maya, Sarini, Agnata Nama, Totaka, Varto Ni, Bhramara Vilasita, Rathoddhata, Vritta Vritta, Sainikavritta, Agnata Nama
.. | .. | .. | 1444
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | x44
.. | .. | .. | ..
.. | .. | .. | 1444 1444
.. | .. | .. | C

Page #25:
---------------------------
13
Preface
Letter
Number
48
44.
Verse Number 1448 1x48 4448
46.
192 24.
420
40
..
248
452
xxxxxxx xxxx xxxxxx
M
Indravansha Putravritta Jaloddhtaagati Pramitaakshara Tamaras Navamalini Pramuditavadana Jaladharamala Majubhashini Agyaat Naam Asambadha Aparajita Praharan Kalika Induvadana Sasikala Rishabhagjavilasit Vanini Shikharini Vanshapatra Patit Kusumitalatavellit Agyaat Chhand Suvadana Agyaat Chhand Chiyogini
3456
56
.
64 272
Cw....
4468 1x6. 9472
x.. 1484 44 42 1.979 Samasht Shlok
365748+32 11429 Anushtup Shlok
Shesh Bache 20
235520
4540
9. Uttarapurana Ka Parimaan
Shlok-Sankhya Anushtup
36.432 Malini Shardulvikrirrit
65476 Dattavilambit Vasantatilaka
7.456 Sragdhara
5484 Rathodta
2450 Upjaati
244 খ
vxv८ Pashchii
9468
3920
192

Page #26:
---------------------------
## Mahapurana - Uttarapurana

**7778**
**Chanda Sloka-Sankhya**
**Akshara Vyogini**
**1442 Harini**
**1468 Swagata 1444**
**44 Praharisini**
**1452 Shikharini**
**1x68 7561**
**24844432**
**7764 Anupa Matrika Chanda, Arya**
**7575 Adipurana 11429 Anushtup Uttarapurana 7778 Anushtup**

**19207** Thus, considering the three parts of the Mahapurana, the total number of Anushtup slokas is nineteen thousand two hundred and seven. This number is similar to the approximate number given by Bhadant Gunabhadra. The number twenty-four thousand given in some manuscripts is incorrect.

**Translation and Acknowledgements:**

I am grateful to Shri Pan. Kapoorchandraji Ayurvedacharya, Shri Lakshmanprasadji 'Prasant' Sahityashastri, Master Parameshthidasji Vidyarthi, Gokulchandraji, and Vidyarthi Rajendrakumarji for their full cooperation in obtaining different versions of the Uttarapurana text. I am also grateful to the venerable Pan. Lalaramji Shastri for his assistance in reading the handwritten manuscripts and for his translation and publication of the Uttarapurana. I am thankful to Shriman Nathuramji Premi and Pan. K. Bhujabali Shahi Moodbidri for their contributions, respectively, of the chapters titled "Ramkathaki Vibhinn Dharaen" and "Bankaapuraka Parichay" in the preface.

This work took two long years to edit and translate. Due to my distance, I could not personally proofread it. Pan. Mahadevji Chaturvedi Vyakaranacharya of Banaras has proofread it, and I am confident that he has taken great care in this regard. This publication is by the Indian Knowledge Institute of Banaras, and I am deeply grateful to its directors and administrators.

The Mahapurana, Padma Purana, and Harivansh Purana are three unique gems of the Digambar Jain Prathamanuyog literature. I have studied them many times. I always wished for their modern edition and translation, which would greatly benefit the general public. I am very happy to have edited and translated the Mahapurana. The need for editing and translating the Padma Purana and Harivansh Purana remains. Let's see when that happens.

This work is great, and my intellect is very limited. Moreover, burdened by the responsibilities of a householder, I am busy with many tasks. Therefore, I apologize to the learned scholars for any possible errors in the translation.

**Sagar Chaitra Shukla Purnima 248 V.S.**

**Vinit Pannalal Sahityacharya**

Page #27:
---------------------------
## Table of Contents

**138**
**210**
**Thirty-eighth Chapter**
**Sixty-first Chapter** Ajitanatha Charitra
**Sixty-second Chapter** Dharmanatha Charitra, Sagar Chakravarti
**Forty-ninth Chapter** Maghava Chakravarti Charitra
**Fiftieth Chapter** Sanatkumar Chakravarti Charitra, Sambhavanatha Charitra
**Sixty-third Chapter** Abhinandanatha Charitra
**Fifty-first Chapter** Description of Abhyudaya
**Sixty-fourth Chapter** Sumatinatha Charitra
**Fifty-second Chapter** Shantinatha Tirthankara and Chakravarti Charitra **175**
**Sixty-fifth Chapter** Padma Prabha Charitra
**Fifty-third Chapter** Kunthunatha Tirthankara and Chakravarti Charitra **213**
**Sixty-sixth Chapter** Suparshvanatha Charitra
**Fifty-fourth Chapter** Arahanatha Charitra
**Fifty-fifth Chapter** Subhauma Chakravarti Charitra, Chandra Prabha Charitra **224**
**Sixty-seventh Chapter** Nandishena Balabhadra, Pundarika Narayana and Pushpadanta Charitra
**Sixty-eighth Chapter** Nishumbha Pratinarayana Charitra **23**
**Sixty-ninth Chapter** Sheetalnath Charitra, Mallinath Charitra
**Fifty-seventh Chapter** Panna Chakravarti Charitra **233**
**Seventy-first Chapter** Shreyansanatha Charitra
**Fifty-eighth Chapter** Nandimitra Balabhadra, Datta Narayana and Balindra Vijay Balabhadra, Triprishtha Narayana and Pratinarayana Charitra
**Seventy-second Chapter** Ashvagriva Pratinarayana Charitra **241**
**Seventy-third Chapter** Munisuvrata Charitra
**Fifty-ninth Chapter** Vasupujya Charitra **227**
**Sixtieth Chapter** Harishena Chakravarti Charitra
**Seventy-fourth Chapter** Triprishtha Narayana, Achal Balabhadra and Tarak Ram Balabhadra, Lakshman Narayana and Ravan Pratinarayana Charitra
**Seventy-fifth Chapter** Pratinarayana Charitra, including King Sagar, Sulasa, Madhupingala, King Vasu, Vimalanatha Charitra
**Sixty-first Chapter** Description of Dharma Balabhadra, Swayambhu Narayana and Madhu Kshirakadambaka, Parvat, Narada etc.
**Seventy-sixth Chapter** Pratinarayana Charitra **250**
**Seventy-seventh Chapter** Sanjayanta, Meru and Mandar Gandhara Charitra **105**
**Seventy-eighth Chapter** Ram, Lakshman, Ravan and Anuman (Hanuman) Charitra
**Seventy-ninth Chapter** Anantanatha Charitra
**Eighty-first Chapter** Suprabha Balabhadra, Purushottama Narayana and Madhusudan Pratinarayana Charitra **124**
**Eighty-second Chapter** Naminatha Charitra, Jayasena Chakravarti **337**

Page #28:
---------------------------
##  

**16**
**Seventieth Chapter**
**Neminath Charitra, including the description of Shri Krishna's victory**
**Seventy-first Chapter**
**Description of the previous births of Shri Krishna, Baldev, Shri Krishna's queens, etc.**
**Seventy-second Chapter**
**Parshvanath Charitra**
**Uttara Purana within the Mahapurana**
**The life story of Neminath Tirthankara, Pradyumna Kumar, Padma Balabhadra, Jarasandha and Brahmadatta Chakravarti Krishna**
**Seventy-third Chapter**
**Seventy-fourth Chapter**
**The life story of Vardhaman Swami**

**The life story of Sati Chandana**
**Description of King Shrenik and Abhaykumar**
**339**
**375**
**407**
**429**
**443**
**466 469**
**Seventy-fifth Chapter**
**Description of King Chetak, Chelna, etc. The life story of Jeevandhar**
**Seventy-sixth Chapter**
**Description of King Chetavahan's attainment of Munihood. Description of the last Kevali, Jambu Swami. Description of Priti-nkar Muni**
**Detailed description of Utsarpini and Avasarpini time periods. Description of Kalki. Description of Kalki's son, Ajit-anjay. Description of the time of destruction.**
**Description of the upcoming Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas**
**The lineage of Mahavira Bhagwan's disciples**
**Epilogue**
**Praise**
**Praise of the commentator**

**42**
**494**
**530**
**531**
**543**
**555**
**557**
**559**
**561**
**563**
**566**
**572**
**579**

Page #29:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, including the Srimad Gunabhadra-composed Uttara Purana, Forty-eighth Chapter.

May the glorious Jina Ajitanatha, whose faultless words, free from contradictions, cleanse the mental impurities of the worthy ones like water, always be victorious! ||1||

I will narrate the Purana of Ajitanatha, which, upon hearing, brings the worthy ones the union with the Lakshmi of liberation, free from obstacles and leading to great prosperity. ||2||

In this Jambudvipa, in the highly renowned eastern Videha region, on the southern bank of the Sita river, lies the vast country called Vatsa. ||3||

In that country, there was a city named Susima, which amazed everyone with its splendor. Once, the king of this Susima city was Vimala Vahana, a very influential ruler. ||4||

It is a well-known fact in the world that those who desire virtues seek them. But in this king, it was a wonder that all the virtues, filled with affection, came and resided with him on their own. ||5||

He was endowed with three powers: the power of enthusiasm, the power of mantras, and the power of fruits, and also with three attainments: the attainment of enthusiasm, the attainment of mantras, and the attainment of fruits. He was free from laziness and ruled his subjects justly, treating them like his own children. ||6||

Remembering that "virtue leads to merit, merit leads to wealth, and wealth leads to the desired enjoyments, without virtue, wealth and desires are not attained," he became a righteous soul through Jain Dharma. ||7||

Once, when the king's infinite, non-rejectable, and rejectable passions subsided, leaving only the burning passion, he attained self-knowledge or the three jewels and became detached from the world. He began to contemplate in solitude, thinking to himself...

Page #30:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana:

"The dwelling in this body is due to the karma of lifespan. Although I reside in this body, my lifespan, like water, is quickly diminishing in these finite hours. Therefore, until my lifespan is exhausted, I will strive with enthusiasm in the Jain path, which leads to heaven and liberation." (6-10)

Thus, breaking the chains of desire, he became indifferent to the riches of the kingdom. Even though he was independent, he was subdued by the riches of initiation, meaning he took Jain initiation along with many other kings. (11)

He practiced austerities for a long time, had a clear understanding of the eleven angas, his soul shone with the light of merit, and he was constantly engaged in contemplation of the sixteen bhavanas, including darshan-vishuddhi. This pure-minded Vimalavahan attained the name of Tirthankara. (12)

Vimalavahan, who conquered his senses, at the end of his lifespan, with his mind fixed on the five supreme beings, attained samadhi-death and became the holder of the lifespan of thirty-three oceans, reaching the victorious, unparalleled aircraft called Vijay. (13)

There, he was born with both material and spiritual white leshya, with a body that was square in shape, one hand high, and beautiful in form, taste, smell, and touch. He took his first breath after sixteen months and fifteen days, and consumed mental food after thirty thousand years. He had knowledge of his own lifespan and encompassed the entire network of the universe, meaning he could see all the elements of the universe with his knowledge of his lifespan. He had the power to uproot the network of the universe and place it elsewhere. He could also perform actions with his body in that same area. He enjoyed the infinite pleasures of non-perception, which were many times greater than the pleasures of perception, which he experienced through the five senses. (14-17)

Six months before this great being was to descend from heaven to earth, due to the influence of the merit of the Tirthankara name, Kubera, by the command of Indra, rained down three and a half crore rannus on the house of King Jitashatru, the ruler of the Bharata Kshetra in Jambudvipa, a descendant of Ikshvaku and belonging to the Kashyapa gotra. (18-20)

Then, on the new moon day of the month of Jyeshta, when the moon was only a fraction of a kala away from the Rohini constellation,

Page #31:
---------------------------
## The Eighty-Fourth Chapter

The queen Vijayaseena, having seen sixteen dreams, looked at the lotus-like face of the Lord, the fragrant ocean, entering her dream.  (22) In the morning, she asked the king Jitasatru, the one who had conquered his enemies, about the meaning of her dreams. (23) The king, with his eyes, the embodiment of knowledge, shining like three suns, told her that a Tirthankara had been born in her pure womb, like a crystal, from the victorious celestial chariot. (24) On the tenth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Magha, the queen Vijayaseena gave birth to the Lord, the master of beings, in the auspicious time of the king. (25) Fifty lakh crore Sagara years had passed since the liberation of Lord Adinath, and within this interval, the second Tirthankara was born. (26) The gods, with beautiful forms, performed the birth-ceremony of the Lord, the conqueror of all, on Mount Meru, and named him Ajitanath. (27) The lifespan of Ajitanath was seventy-two lakh Pūrva, and his height was four hundred and fifty Dhanus. (28) The color of his body was like gold, and he had conquered all external and internal enemies. (29) He ruled for three parts of his lifespan, minus one lakh Pūrva, and one Pūrva-ang. (30) He enjoyed praiseworthy pleasures, embraced by the goddess of fortune, thinking, "Will my enjoyment end with you, or will my life end first?" (31) Once, while sitting comfortably on the roof of his palace, he saw a large meteor, which seemed to be shaking the goddess of fortune. (32) It is fitting that the best of the wise, Ajitanath, became detached from worldly desires at that moment, for what reason is there for one who is about to attain liberation to cling to fortune? (33) At that time, the celestial beings, led by Sarasvat, came from the Brahma-loka and praised and confirmed his thoughts. (34)

Page #32:
---------------------------
Just as people see with their eyes but the sun assists them, similarly, although the Lord was himself enlightened, the words of the worldly gods helped him in his true perception. || 35 || He gave the kingdom, fit to be abandoned by wise men, to his son Ajit Sena, after his coronation, like a leftover meal. || 36 || The gods performed his initiation-auspiciousness-related grand coronation. Afterwards, he mounted the palanquin named "Su-Prabha" and proceeded towards the "Sa-Hetuk" forest. His palanquin was first lifted by humans, then by the "Vidyadharas" and then by the gods. || 37 || On the ninth day of the bright fortnight of the month of "Magha", with the "Rohini" constellation rising, he went near the "Saptaparna" tree in the "Sa-Hetuk" forest and, in the evening, with a thousand obedient kings, he took the vow of "Vela" and adopted "Samyama" - took initiation. || 38-39 || As soon as he took initiation, he became endowed with "Manah-Paryaya" knowledge and on the second day, he entered the city of "Saketa", bringing unprecedented joy to the donors. || 40 || There, the king named "Brahma" gave him donations in order and, by binding the "Sata-Vedaniya" and other virtuous qualities, he obtained the "Pancha-Ashcharya". || 41 || The Lord, the holder of pure knowledge, spent twelve years in the state of "Chhadma-Sthya". Afterwards, on the eleventh day of the bright fortnight of "Pausha", in the evening, with the "Rohini" constellation, he attained "Aapta-Pana" - he became omniscient by attaining the "Lokala-Lokavabhasi" "Kevala-Jnana". || 42 || He had ninety "Gana-Dharas" including "Singha-Sena". There were three thousand seven hundred fifty "Purva-Dharis", twenty-one thousand six hundred "Shikshak", nine thousand four hundred "Avadhi-Jnani", twenty thousand "Kevala-Jnani", twenty thousand four hundred "Vikriya-Riddhi" holders, twelve thousand four hundred fifty "Manah-Paryaya-Jnani" and twelve thousand four hundred "Anuttar-Vadi". Thus, in total, there were one lakh "Tapasvi", three lakh twenty thousand "Aryikas" including "Prakubja", three lakh "Shravakas" and five lakh "Shravikas", and countless gods and goddesses. Thus, there were twelve assemblies of his. || 43-48 || Thus, surrounded by twelve assemblies, Lord Ajitnath elaborates on the world, liberation, their causes and the differences in their fruits.

Page #33:
---------------------------
## The Forty-Fourth Chapter

**Malini Samvasaran**

Beholding the auspicious gaze of the Samvasaran Lakshmi, he was adorned with eight auspicious signs, the eight Pralihays, indicative of his good deeds. He had conquered the hostile karmas, the Avyahta, and was yet to conquer the remaining hostile karmas, the Vihata. His dispassion was intense, he was the guru of both himself and others, worthy of being prayed to by those who had achieved their goals, and he was supremely renowned. || 50 ||

**Sardulavikridita**

"He is not conquered by sins, nor can any opponent conquer him," thus he attained the meaningful name "Ajita."  He is worthy of praise from the wise.  Having wandered throughout the entire Aryan land, he reached Sammed Shikhar and remained there for two months, devoid of divine sounds. || 51 ||

At that time, he destroyed countless karmic tendencies, established his own state, and fulfilled the world with his righteous conduct. He destroyed the power of yoga through subtle meditation, separated the three bodies - Audarika, Taijasa, and Karmana - and attained supreme purity. He then attained the eight qualities, including infinite knowledge, by relying on the fourth white meditation, the Vyuparatakriyanivarti. || 52 ||

Thus, on the fifth day of the Chaitra month, when the moon was in the Rohini constellation, the Lord Ajitanatha, who had adopted the form of a statue, attained liberation in the morning. || 53 ||

**Drutavilambita**

O noble beings, bow down to the victorious, the supreme god, the Ajita Jinendra, who was invincible in the battle of the Vimala Vahan, who then engaged in the destruction of sins through penance, and who then became the repository of happiness in the victorious Vimala Vahan. || 54 ||

Page #34:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, in the Sārdūlavikrīḍita meter,
Thus, Dharma, the giver of great merit, arising from sixteen contemplations,
Establishes a lineage of peace, in Shiva, the eternal,
Pure, it eradicates the entire web of evil karma, through right understanding.
Therefore, O wise ones, abandon pride and embrace Dharma,
With pure and enlightened minds. || 55 ||

Among the Tirthankaras, he who is second, yet unparalleled in the path of the scriptures,
May the poet assist in fulfilling the vast path of the Purana, for Ajitanatha. || 56 ||

**The Description of Sagara Chakravarti**
In the Tirtha of the second Tirthankara, Ajitanatha, there was a second Chakravarti named Sagara.
O wise Srenika, now listen to his story. || 57 ||

In this Jambudvipa, in the east, in Videha, on the southern bank of the Sita River,
There was a country called Vatsakavati. In it, the ruler of the city of Prithvi,
Was King Jayasena, served by the people. His wife was also named Jayasena.
They had two sons, named Ratishena and Dhritiṣena. || 58-59 ||

Those fortunate sons, with their brilliance, always conquered the sun and moon,
And their parents, like the sky and earth, never separated from them,
Meaning, they always kept them close due to affection. || 60 ||

One day, for some reason, Ratishena died. It is right, for what is not a cause of death?
Meaning, when the time of death arrives, everything becomes a cause of death. || 61 ||

The sorrow-like thunderbolt, emerging from the cloud of Ratishena's death,
Struck King Jayasena, along with his wife, like a Kalpavriksha with its vines. || 62 ||

At that time, seizing the opportunity, the swoon, which precedes Yama, embraced them both,
Meaning, they both fainted. It is right, for enemies, having obtained an opening, do not remain without doing harm. || 63 ||

Through the best remedies of physicians, they gradually regained consciousness.
Then, like Brihaspati, the great guru, with great difficulty, explained to King Jayasena. || 64 ||

Thereafter, considering this body as a house of sorrow, he became eager to subdue it.
And, ready to kill Yama, it is right for the wise to do so. || 65 ||

Greetings. || 54 ||

Page #35:
---------------------------
## Forty-eighth Chapter

He began to consider possessions like old leaves, those that end life or are the senses, and appointed his son, the fortunate Ārya Dhṛtiṣeṇa, to the enjoyment of the kingdom. He attained the pure path of liberation, as instructed by the teacher Yaśodhara, with many kings and with his brother-in-law, Mahārūta. 

In the end, he renounced the world, and in the final Kalpa, he became the god Mahābala in the Acyuta heaven. 

Mahārūta, his brother-in-law, also became a god in the same heaven, named Maṇikeṭu. There, they made a mutual agreement: "Whoever of us is born first in the world of mortals, the other will be his teacher."

Thus, they spent twenty-two oceans worth of time in the enjoyment of the gods. 

Then, in the city of Saketa in the Kośala country, Mahābala was born as the son of King Samudravijaya and Queen Subālā, named Sāgara. His lifespan was seventy lakhs of years. He was four hundred and fifty dhanuṣas tall, complete with all auspicious marks, prosperous, and radiant like gold. 

He spent eighteen lakhs of years in his youth. After that, he became the ruler of a great kingdom. After that, he spent an equal amount of time, and then the Chakra-ratna, capable of conquering the six continents, appeared. His fame, like a wheel, conquered the directions, and he was full of prowess. 

Like the first Chakravarti, Bharata, he conquered the directions for a long time, took the essence of the conquered lands, and made everyone submit to his command. 

Then, he returned to Saketa, the abode of imperial glory, and enjoyed the tenfold pleasures without any hindrance or interruption. 

He had sixty thousand sons, who seemed to be the very qualities of their father, manifested in the form of sons. 

Once, in the Siddhivana, the four-faced Muni, Śrīnāma, attained the knowledge that illuminates all things. 

At his auspicious festival, Maṇikeṭu came along with other gods and Indras. There, he wanted to know, "Where is our Mahābala?"

Page #36:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that Sagara became a Chakravarti due to his remaining punya (merit). Knowing this, Maniketu approached Sagara and said, "Why do you remember? We both used to say in the Achyuta heaven that whoever among us would be born first on earth would guide the other."

"O Bhavy (noble one), you have enjoyed the essence of the human birth, the kingdom, for a long time. What is the benefit of these enjoyments, which are like the fangs of a serpent, causing fear? O King, now strive for liberation."

Even after Maniketu said this, Sagara remained indifferent. This is understandable, for how can the path of liberation be attained without the grace of time?

Knowing Sagara's indifference, Maniketu engaged in other conversations and returned. This is also appropriate, for those who know the order of things, even if they speak harshly, do not act against someone's will, even for their own good.

"These enjoyments are despicable, they make people deviate from their own words, they generate sin, and they are very difficult to abandon." Thus, Maniketu, having attained detachment, went to heaven.

Then, after some time, Maniketu devised another plan to make the king embrace austerity and descended to earth. He assumed the form of a Charan Muni, endowed with many qualities. He was like the moon in radiance, like the sun in brilliance, and like Kamadeva in the beauty of his body. Thus, having conquered his senses, he cultivated supreme restraint and, after paying homage to the Jina, he stayed in Sagara's temple.

Seeing him, Sagara was astonished and asked, "Why have you adopted this state of austerity?" The Charan Muni replied, "Youth is consumed by old age, life is diminishing every moment, this body is impure, sinful, difficult to control, and a vessel of suffering, therefore it is worthy of abandonment. There is always a union with undesirable things and a separation from desirable things. This whirlpool of the world has been going on since time immemorial and yet it continues endlessly. All this state of the living being is caused by the enemies in the form of karma. Therefore, I will burn these karma-enemies with the fire of austerity and attain the eternal purity, like a golden gem, and attain liberation."

Page #37:
---------------------------
The Eighty-fourth Chapter

Thus spoken to, the king of the world, though trembling, did not fall. He was firmly bound by the chains of his sons, the path of liberation closed. 14

"His samsara is not too short," he thought, filled with sorrow. "What wise man does not grieve when his efforts are fruitless?" 95

"He has been subdued by the paltry wealth of his kingdom, and has forgotten the true wealth of Achyuta. This is the ignorance of the lustful." 96

"I believe he considers the gain of sons to be the greatest gain, above all other gains, even heaven and liberation. He is deeply attached to them." 97

One day, his sons, proud and arrogant like lion cubs, approached the king in the assembly and said, "If the youth of Kshatriya sons, endowed with valor and courage, does not fulfill their father's desire in a difficult task, then what is the use of such youth? What is the benefit of such a birth or such a life? Birth and life are common to all beings. Therefore, O King, give us a task that will fill us with courage and remove the lowliness that arises from merely being fed." 98-101

Hearing this, the king rejoiced and said, "My sons, everything has been accomplished by the wheel. What is there between the Himalayas and the ocean that I have not achieved? This is my task for you: together, enjoy my vast kingdom as you see fit." 102-103

Thus, the king dissuaded them, and they remained silent. This is right, for sons born of a pure lineage are obedient to their father. 104

One day, filled with self-purification, they went to the king again and said, "If you do not give us a task, we will not eat." 105

Hearing this, the king was troubled. He pondered, "What task should I give them?" Suddenly, he remembered...

Page #38:
---------------------------
10
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
You were commanded by the king, Bharata Chakravarti, to build twenty-four temples for the Arhant Devas on Mount Kailasa with great jewels. You should make the Ganga River a moat around the mountain for those temples. Thus, you should do so quickly with the Danda Ratna. 107-108
Maniketu, motivated by love and kindness, thought about a suitable way to explain this to King Sagara with his ministers. 109
There are four types of words: some are both beneficial and pleasant, some are beneficial and unpleasant, some are pleasant and beneficial, and some are both unpleasant and harmful. Of these four types of words, one can give advice using the remaining two types of words, leaving out the last two. Having decided this, Maniketu went to Mount Kailasa and, taking the form of a cruel serpent, turned the arrogant princes into a pile of ashes. It is right because when ministers see no other way, they use unpleasant words even if they are beneficial. 110-112
The ministers knew how much the king loved his sons, so even though they knew of their death, they were unable to tell the king. They were not even able to tell him, but they were hiding it. 113
Then Maniketu, taking the form of a Brahmin, went to Chakravarti Sagara and, overwhelmed with great sorrow, said the following words. 114
"O Deva! While you are protecting the earth, we are all well here, but even though the time of death is far away, Yama has taken my son. He was my only son. If you do not make him alive with his lifespan, then consider me also taken by Yama today in your presence. Because what do arrogant people not do? One who is eager to eat unripe fruit, why would he leave ripe fruit?" 115-117
Hearing the Brahmin's words, the king said, "O Brahmin King! Do you not know that Yama is only prevented by the Siddha Bhagavans, not by other beings? This is well known to everyone, young and old." 118
In this world, there are many beings whose lifespan is cut short in the middle. Yama, who is beyond the reach of death, takes all of them. 119
There is still one task of Dharma left. He happily commanded, "Bharata Chakravarti has built twenty-four temples for the Arhant Devas on Mount Kailasa with great jewels. You people should make the Ganga River a moat around the mountain for those temples." Those princes also did that work quickly according to their father's command. 106-108
Maniketu, motivated by love and kindness, thought about a suitable way to explain this to King Sagara with his ministers. 109
There are four types of words: some are both beneficial and pleasant, some are beneficial and unpleasant, some are pleasant and beneficial, and some are both unpleasant and harmful. Of these four types of words, one can give advice using the remaining two types of words, leaving out the last two. Having decided this, Maniketu went to Mount Kailasa and, taking the form of a cruel serpent, turned the arrogant princes into a pile of ashes. It is right because when ministers see no other way, they use unpleasant words even if they are beneficial. 110-112
The ministers knew how much the king loved his sons, so even though they knew of their death, they were unable to tell the king. They were not even able to tell him, but they were hiding it. 113
Then Maniketu, taking the form of a Brahmin, went to Chakravarti Sagara and, overwhelmed with great sorrow, said the following words. 114
"O Deva! While you are protecting the earth, we are all well here, but even though the time of death is far away, Yama has taken my son. He was my only son. If you do not make him alive with his lifespan, then consider me also taken by Yama today in your presence. Because what do arrogant people not do? One who is eager to eat unripe fruit, why would he leave ripe fruit?" 115-117
Hearing the Brahmin's words, the king said, "O Brahmin King! Do you not know that Yama is only prevented by the Siddha Bhagavans, not by other beings? This is well known to everyone, young and old." 118
In this world, there are many beings whose lifespan is cut short in the middle. Yama, who is beyond the reach of death, takes all of them. 119

Page #39:
---------------------------
The Forty-Eighth Chapter
11
If you harbor hatred for Yama, do not waste away in your home. Quickly embrace liberation-diksha, abandoning sorrow. He said this to him. || 120 ||
Hearing this, the king said, "O Deva! If it is true that there is no one stronger than Yama, then I will not be afraid of anything I say. || 121 ||
All your sons who went to dig a pit on Mount Kailasa have been taken by Yama to his own place. Therefore, you should follow the path you have spoken of and harbor great hatred for the wicked Yama, that is, you should strive to conquer Yama by taking diksha. || 122 ||
Hearing these words, King Sagara, whose heart was shattered like a diamond, became motionless like a dead man for a moment. || 123 ||
He regained consciousness through the water mixed with sandalwood and khus, the words of his friends, and the gentle breeze of the wings. He began to think, "May this Maya, which is like wealth, not come to me, I do not need it. This desire is terrible, Yama is low, the union of love is perishable, the body is impure, perishable, and therefore not worth consuming or is harmful. This youth is as perishable as a rainbow. Knowing this, the Jina goes to the forest. But I am a fool, I am still foolish in these things..." Thinking this, King Sagara entrusted the kingdom to Bhavy Bhagiratha, the son of Vidarbha, the daughter of the king of the Bhagali country, Singhvikram, and he himself adorned the kingdom of penance by taking diksha near the steadfast Dharma Jina. It is right, because a virtuous man stays at home only as long as there is no reason to become detached. || 124-128 ||
While the king took diksha, Maniketu Deva went to his sons and said, "Someone has told the king about your death, and hearing this, he has been greatly afflicted with sorrow and has taken up penance after giving the kingdom to Bhagiratha. I am a Brahmin who has come from your lineage, and I have come here to find you because of sorrow. || 129-130 ||
Saying this, the Deva approached the princes who were covered in the ashes of Maya and enlightened them, saying, "Maya is also for the benefit of friends." || 131 ||

Page #40:
---------------------------
## Chapter 12: Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

132.  Hearing the words of Maniketu, those who were at the end of their physical forms, embraced austerity, seeking refuge in the Jina. This was indeed fitting for those who knew what was right.

133.  Bhagiratha, having heard this, went to them, paid homage with devotion, and learned the Dharma as spoken by the Jina, accepting the vows of a Shravaka.

134.  Maniketu, the friend of all, revealed his entire Maya to those sages, including Sagara, and said, "Forgive me."

135.  "What offense is there? You have done what was beneficial and dear to us," they comforted Maniketu with words filled with joy, pacifying him.

136.  The Devata, whose purpose was fulfilled, was pleased and ascended to heaven. It is through fulfilling the purposes of others that the great ones find satisfaction.

137.  All those wise ones, having practiced austerity for a long time, reached the supreme state through Sammed Shikhar, attaining liberation through pure meditation.

138.  Hearing of their liberation, Bhagiratha's mind was filled with sorrow. He entrusted his kingdom to Varadatta and went to Mount Kailasa, where he received initiation from the great sage Shiv Gupta. He then took up the practice of Pratimā Yoga on the banks of the Ganga.

139-140.  Indra, the king of the gods, poured the water of the Milky Ocean over Bhagiratha's feet. The flow of this water merged with the Ganga. From that time onwards, the Ganga became a pilgrimage site in this world.

141.  Having performed great austerities on the banks of the Ganga, Bhagiratha attained liberation.

## Chapter 1: Shārdūlavikridita

142.  O Shrenik! In this world and the next, there is no one who is as beneficial as a friend, nor is there a brother greater than a friend. Even secrets that are not spoken to a guru or parents are shared with a friend. A friend, disregarding even his own life, fulfills even the most difficult tasks. Maniketu is a clear example of such a friend.

Page #41:
---------------------------
Forty-eighth Chapter
Malini, he who conquered the enemy army, Jayasena, is victorious.
He is known as Mahabala Deva in the Achyuta heaven,
He was the invincible Sagara Chakravarti,
And finally, he destroyed his mortal body,
And became the soul, the holder of the body. ||14||
Thus ends the forty-eighth chapter of the Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa,
compiled by the venerable Gunabhadracharya,
which describes the Tirthankara Ajita and the Chakravarti Sagara. ||48||
Such a friend should be made. ||142||
May King Sagara, who conquered the enemy army,
became Mahabala Deva in the Achyuta heaven,
then became the invincible Sagara Chakravarti,
and finally destroyed his mortal body,
remaining only as the soul, the holder of the body,
always be victorious. ||143||
Thus ends the forty-eighth chapter of the Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa,
compiled by the venerable Gunabhadracharya,
known as the Ārṣa,
which describes the Tirthankara Ajitanatha and the Chakravarti Sagara. ||48||

Page #42:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-First Chapter

May the Tirthankara Sambhavanatha, who is like a mirror illuminating all things with his knowledge and who destroys all forms of hypocrisy, bless me with prosperity. ||1||

In the past, in the Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, on the northern bank of the Sita River, there was a country called Kachcha. In its city of Kshemapura, King Vimalavahana ruled. ||2||

This king, destined for liberation in the near future, became detached from worldly affairs for some reason. He began to contemplate that there are three causes of dispassion in this world. ||3||

Firstly, this living being, even while residing between the teeth of Yama (the god of death), desires to live. Due to the rise of moha karma (karma of delusion), he does not contemplate a way to escape from it. Therefore, this ignorance-filled darkness is to be condemned. ||4||

Secondly, the lifespan of this living being is countless moments. They have taken refuge in these moments, but it is surprising that these moments of life lead them to Yama's presence for their destruction. ||5||

Thirdly, these living beings, scorched by the heat of desire, seek refuge in the shade of the dilapidated banks of the river of worldly pleasures. May their refuge protect them well. ||6||

Contemplating thus, King Vimalavahana relinquished his kingdom to a minister named Vimalakirti and accepted discipleship from the Jina, the Self-Luminous one, i.e., he took initiation from him. ||7||

Being a knower of the eleven Angas, he bound himself with the karma of name, which causes disturbance in the three worlds, through the sixteen causes of contemplation. ||8||

Finally, he relinquished his body through the method of renunciation and became a Graveyaka, residing in the Sudarshana Vimana, possessing great powers. ||9||

His lifespan was twenty-three Sagaras, his body was sixty angulas tall, his complexion was white, he breathed once every eleven and a half months, he remembered food with his mind after twenty-three thousand years, his enjoyments were devoid of any investigation, his knowledge of the future extended to the end of the seventh hell, he had the power to move within the realm of his knowledge of the future, his radiance was as vast as his body, and his knowledge of the future extended as far as his radiance. ||10-12||

Page #43:
---------------------------
The Fifty-First Chapter

Endowed with the qualities of Animadi, bestowed with the five auspicious births, I, the glorious, the best among the immortals, experienced the happiness of Indra. || 13 ||

In this island, in the land of Bharata, in the city of Sravasti, there was a king named Dridharaja, belonging to the Kashyapa gotra. || 14 ||

He was of the Vallabha Ikshvaku dynasty, and his wife was named Sushena. Six months before the birth of the aforementioned deity, Sushena received the blessings of rain of jewels and other auspicious signs. || 15 ||

On the eighth day of the bright fortnight of Phalguna, in the morning, in the constellation Mrigashira, due to the auspicious birth, Queen Sushena saw sixteen dreams. || 16 ||

Then, in her dream, she saw a magnificent elephant, with a form like the peak of Mount Meru, entering her mouth. || 17 ||

Hearing the interpretation of these dreams from her husband, she was filled with joy. On that very day, Ahamindra entered her womb. || 18 ||

Later, in the ninth month, on the full moon day of Kartik, in the constellation Mrigashira and the auspicious yoga, she gave birth to the revered Ahamindra, endowed with the three knowledges. After the celebration of the birth anniversary, he was known as Sambhava. || 19 ||

O Sambhava, at your birth, happiness is bestowed upon the world, even without the ripening of the karma of the Tirthankaras. || 20 ||

O Lord, your body, like a mango tree, is adorned with numerous auspicious signs and flowers, and the bees, in the form of the eyes of the gods, remain forever satisfied on its branches, which are like long arms. || 21 ||

O God, just as the pure brilliance of Syadvada shines, rejecting the doctrines of Kapila and others, so too your pure brilliance shines, rejecting the brilliance of others. || 22 ||

Just as sandalwood, with its fragrance that delights all beings, benefits the world, so too you, with the three kinds of knowledge born with you, benefit the world. || 23 ||

O Lord, this world, filled with love for you, bows down to you, who are like a lamp, benefiting without any cause, and who are like a treasure, shining brightly. || 24 ||

Thus, the first king of heaven, Saudharmendra, who performed the play of joy, having offered his obeisance to the Lord for his parents, departed for heaven with the gods. || 25 ||

Page #44:
---------------------------
16
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
1
When thirty lakh crore oceans had passed in the second Tirthankara's lineage, Sambhavanatha Swami was born. His lifespan was also included in this interval. He had sixty lakh previous lifespans and his body was four hundred dhanus tall. When one-fourth of his lifespan had passed, he attained the great glory of kingship. He constantly experienced the happiness bestowed by the gods. || 26-28 ||

Thus, while enjoying happiness, when forty lakh previous lifespans and four purvaangas had passed, one day, seeing the illusion of clouds, he attained self-knowledge. At that very moment, he became detached and the world-ending Shri Sambhavanatha Swami began to think in his mind about lifespan, etc., in this way: || 26-30 ||

That the karma of lifespan residing within the being is Yama, others have mistakenly called someone else Yama. The beings of the world do not know this secret, therefore, they are killed by Yama countless times. || 31 ||

Yama destroys this body while residing within it, yet see the foolishness of this being that it dwells in this very body. || 32 ||

This being, immersed in the rasa of attachment, considers even tasteless objects like poison to be delicious and consumes them, therefore, damnation to the illusion of its intellect that has been going on since time immemorial. || 33 ||

Happiness in the world arises from the presence of the soul, senses, lifespan, and desired objects. The presence of the soul is always present for this being, yet why does it not know and why does it not contemplate this? This Lakshmi, like the flash of lightning, never attains stability. The being who abandons its desire, that being, illuminated by the rays of pure right knowledge, can attain the liberated Lakshmi. || 34-35 ||

Thus, praising Sambhavanatha Swami, who had grasped the essence of things, the Laukantika gods departed. And the Lord, giving the kingdom to his son, attained the celebration of the initiation ceremony, mounted on a palanquin named Siddhartha, carried by the gods, and departed from the city. He took vows of restraint in the Sahetuka forest with a thousand kings. || 36-37 ||

As soon as he took initiation, he attained Manahparyaya-jnana. The Lord, bearing the radiance like gold, entered the city of Sravasti on the second day for alms. || 38 ||

There, King Surendradatta, bearing the radiance like the ear, awaited him, gave him food and alms, and in which
1 Ayushi ite gate satiti arthah. 2 Sammatikrame lo. 3 Sanidhi lo. 4 Svasannidhairiha sthayam kha, gha. Sa sanidhi riha sthayaam ga, ka. 5 Vicchinnnechcha ka, gha. Vyuchchinnnechcha shrayet sthatum ka, kha, ga, gha. 6 Muni ka, kha, ga, gha.

Page #45:
---------------------------
The forty-first chapter, the chapter of the silent vow. The pure-minded one, the Lord Sambhavanatha, remained in the state of *chhadmastha* for fourteen years. After that, he went to the *dikshavana* and attained the state of *kevala jnana* under the *shalmali* tree on the fourth day of the dark fortnight of Kartik, in the *mrigashira* constellation, in the evening. He destroyed the four types of *ghatiya karma* and attained the *ananta chatushtaya*. 

He celebrated the *kaivlya* festival, the festival of knowledge and liberation, with the *kalpavasis* and the three types of gods, including the *jyautishkas*. 

Just as Mount Meru is adorned by many other smaller mountains, so too was Lord Sambhavanatha adorned by one hundred and five *ganadharas*, including *Charushena*. 

He was surrounded by two thousand one hundred and fifty *purvadharis*, and had one lakh nineteen thousand three hundred *shikshak*s. 

He was accompanied by nine thousand six hundred *avadhi jnanis* and fifteen thousand *kevala jnanis*. 

Nineteen thousand eight hundred *vikriya riddhi* holders were with him, and twelve thousand one hundred and fifty *manahparyaya jnanis* were in his assembly. 

He was adorned by twelve thousand *vadis*, and thus he was adorned by two lakh *munis*. 

He had three lakh twenty thousand *aryikas*, including the *dharmaryas*, three lakh *shravaks*, and five lakh *shravikas*. Countless *dev-devis* and countless *tiryaks* praised him. Thus, he was the lord of the twelve assemblies that uphold the dharma. 

He was the lord of thirty-four *atishyas* and eight *pratiharys*. He delighted everyone with the divine light of his voice, and he illuminated those who bowed to him like the sun. 

Lord Sambhavanatha rejected the moon, because the moon travels in both the *sudi* and *vadi* fortnights, but the Lord travels only in the pure, faultless fortnight. The moon is devoid of wealth during the day, but the Lord is accompanied by the wealth of liberation. The moon is marked by blemishes, but the Lord is free from blemishes and sin. The moon is afraid of the attacks of *rah*u and *megh* and is afflicted by decay, but the Lord is fearless, free from fear, and free from disease. The moon has many enemies in the form of *rah*u*, *megh*, and other coverings, but the Lord has no enemies. The moon is the cause of the *kupaksha* or dark fortnight, but the Lord destroys the *kupaksha* or impure principles. The moon appears devoid of stars during the day, but the Lord is always accompanied by the *munis* who are like stars. The moon increases desire, but the Lord is the enemy of desire. The moon is devoid of brilliance, but the Lord is the holder of great brilliance. The moon does not remain circular except during the full moon, but the Lord...

Page #46:
---------------------------
18
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
He is always served by the three worlds, the revealer of the knowledge of the auspicious lotus. He has destroyed both kinds of darkness, the illuminator of the world and the non-world. || 53 ||
He, having made the moon below, wandered for the sake of the rain of Dharma. His actions, like the clouds, are beneficial to the happiness of the world. || 54 ||
Having reached Mount Sammed, he abandoned the practice of wandering and, along with a thousand munis, he took on the form of a statue. || 55 ||
On the sixth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Chaitra, when the sun was about to set, he attained the Lakshmi of liberation in his own birth star. || 56 ||
The gods, having worshipped him, the master of the fifth knowledge, who has attained the fifth path, in the fifth auspicious event, went to their respective places. || 57 ||
ShaardoolavikreeDita
Having transcended the eight best qualities of restraint in order, he, the destroyer of karma, the expert in the eight worst means, is skilled in the eight worst means. || 58 ||
Maalini
He, who has attained the vast and pure Lakshmi, who has seen the Lakshmi of love, who was the pure king Vimala Vaahana on this earth, who has defeated the sun with the brilliance of his body, who was the king Ahamindra, who has embraced the Lakshmi of auspiciousness, may Sambhava, the lord, bless you all. || 59 ||
Thus ends the 49th chapter of the Sambhava Tirthankara Puraana, in the collection of the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadraacharya, known as Aarsha.
1.  Lokaloko prakaasayan lo.
2.  Chaitra maasi go.
3.  Sanchitaaye lo. Sanchitapunyaah.
4.  Sambhava vidhu lo.

Page #47:
---------------------------
The fifty-first chapter: Truth in words, truth in the speaker, truth in the speaker's words. May this one, who is the object of veneration, who delights and is delighted, protect us all. || 1 || In the Jambudvipa, in the Videha region, in the south of the Sita river, there is a country called Mangalavati. || 2 || In its city of Ratna-sancaya, there was a king named Mahabala. He was endowed with great wealth and was the refuge of the four varnas and ashramas. || 3 || While he protected the earth, the word "injustice" was never heard, and all the people went about their business without any hindrance. || 4 || In that king, who destroyed his enemies, the six qualities of peace, war, etc., were also present, and even though he was devoid of qualities, he was still virtuous by virtue of his renunciation, truth, etc. || 5 || He was the sole husband of Lakshmi. Although Saraswati, Kirti, and Viralakshmi were his co-wives, he was happy with all of them. || 6 || His fame resides in the words and ears of others, Saraswati resides in his words, Viralakshmi resides in his chest, and I reside in all his limbs - thinking this, Lakshmi was very pleased. || 6-7 || His body, like a Kalpa-tree, was beautiful with a woman-like Kalpa-lata, and it granted whatever he desired. || 8 || His eyes, like bees, were always eager to serve the lotus-like faces of beautiful women. Thus, Mahabala, the king, spent a long time happily, like one of the kalas of time. || 9 || Once, due to dissatisfaction with the enjoyment of desires, he developed dispassion. With a generous heart, he gave the kingdom to his son, Dhanapala, and went to the guru, Vimala-vahana, to practice restraint. He became a follower of the eleven angas and contemplated the sixteen causes of emotions. || 10-11 || By contemplating the sixteen causes of emotions, he performed the karma-bandha of the Tirthankara, which gives the fruit of the five auspicious qualities. Thus, he will become a Tirthankara. It is right, for what is not attainable for those who are devoted to their minds? || 12 || At the end of his life, he died in samadhi and attained the state of Indra for thirty-three oceans of years, being the first in the line of conquerors. || 13 ||

Page #48:
---------------------------
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana
There, it is said that the one who knows the Leshya, the one who is endowed with the qualities of breath, etc., the one who enjoys the five senses, the one who is peaceful in mind, the one who is endowed with the wealth of meditation and detachment, the one who is devoted to the Arhat, the one who will destroy all karma in that very life, will be born in this world. ||14-15||
When the time for his birth came, in this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, in the city of Ayodhya, there was a king named Swayamvara, who was a descendant of the Ikshvaku dynasty, of the Kashyapa gotra, and who possessed extraordinary splendor. His queen was named Siddhartha. Six months before the birth of Ahamindra, Siddhartha received the worship of rain, etc.
On the sixth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Vaisakha, on the seventh auspicious constellation (Punarvasu), after seeing sixteen dreams, she saw an elephant entering her mouth. At that very moment, Ahamindra entered her womb. ||16-18||
Hearing the fruit of the dreams from the king, she was very pleased and on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Magha, in the Aditi yoga, she gave birth to a virtuous and excellent son. ||16||
Due to the influence of that son, Indra's throne trembled, and by his knowledge of the future, the wise one knew the birth of the Lord of the Three Worlds. ||20||
Indra, with his consort Sachi, received that divine human being and, surrounded by the gods, quickly went to Mount Sumeru. There, he placed him on a divine throne, bathed him with the water of the ocean of milk, adorned him with ornaments, and named him Abhinandan. ||21-22||
At that time, Indra, who had created many arms and thousands of eyes, who was filled with many emotions and tastes, performed a Tandava dance in the sky-like courtyard with wonderful ornaments, beginning with the creation of the ornaments.
He showed many acts. At that time, his passion had reached its peak, and he was also making other heroic actors dance. ||23-24||
Returning from the birth ceremony, Indra came to the city of Ayodhya, removed the illusory child, placed the real child before his parents, and went to heaven. ||25||
After the interval of ten lakh crore years after the Tirthankara Shri Sambhavanatha, Abhinandanatha Swami was born. His lifespan was also included in this interval.

Page #49:
---------------------------
He was adorned with the three knowledges of faith, conduct, and knowledge, his lifespan was fifty lakhs purvas, his body was three hundred and a half dhanushas tall, he was radiant like the moon, or like a group of auspicious deeds whose brilliance was manifest. ||26-27|| He was attaining prosperity and wealth, delighting everyone with his qualities. His radiance was like that of gold. Like the charioteer of Kamadeva, when twelve and a half lakhs purvas had passed in his youth, his father gave him the kingdom, saying, "Enjoy the kingdom," and went to the forest to perform austerities. At that time, he attained the kingdom. ||28-29|| At that time, the moon desired his radiance, the sun desired his brilliance, Indra desired his wealth, and desires desired his peace. ||30|| Due to the infinite growth of his excellent qualities, all his auspicious atoms bore fruit every moment. ||31|| He had conquered the brilliance of all others, and delighted all beings, and had even conquered the moon and the sun, thus he was adorned with his own brilliance. ||31-32|| All the kings bowed their heads to him, what praise is there for him? For he was a pious soul by birth, and even Indra worshipped his feet. ||33|| When the goddess of liberation made him the object of her glances, the goddess of fortune became enamored of him, what wonder is there in this? ||34|| He had pure, unwavering, and indestructible right faith, and the auspicious nature of a Tirthankara. It is fitting, for what greater wealth of the soul is there for a man who desires to conquer the three worlds? ||35|| He was bold in his youth, restrained in his youth, peaceful in his youth, and attained a state of boldness and loftiness in his final youth. ||36|| His three powers of enthusiasm, mantra, and dominion bore fruit in the form of the dharma-following siddhi. It is fitting, for these are the powers that benefit both worlds. ||37|| His fame was filled with scriptures, his praise was inscribed with verses and letters, his presence was pleasing to people, and his remembrance always occurred during the discussion of qualities. ||38|| He was complete with all the best qualities even before he was born. If this were not so, then in the womb,
१ चापगः ख० । चापसः ग० । २ तलेन्दुरिव घ० । ३ पुण्योघो वा ससद्रसः ग० । पुण्योदावाससदसः
पुण्यौधो वा स्फुटद्रविः ल० । ४ कामतां दधौ क०, ख०, ग० । कामसा दधौ घ० । ५-मीप्स्यत्यहपतिः क०, ख, ग, घ०। ६ रवतेजसा क०, ख०। ७ रागिणी मास्या ग०, ख० । रागिणी सास्या ल० । ८ जयीक्षिणः ग० । जगत्रितयजयैषिणः ल० । अत्र पाठे छन्दोभङ्गः । ६ धोरप्रशान्तः घ०, क० ।

Page #50:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the supreme triad of knowledge, abundant and originating from the past, is described. What other virtues of wisdom are to be described by the wise? (40) The extraordinary zeal of this one should not be described separately, for he desires to destroy the enemy of delusion, along with all other evils, the thorn of the three worlds. (41) Even at birth, his prowess was such that it made the midday sun powerless. Who else could withstand him at this time? (42) All his virtues are increasing as if they are vying with each other. Who can stop the rivalry of those who are growing together? (43) Thus, the Lord Abhinandanatha, who enjoyed the vast collection of the finest pleasures of the world, was like the rising sun for the dawn of the knowledge of liberation. (44) When thirty-six lakh and a half of his reign had passed and eight of the eight parts of the income remained, he was one day looking at the clouds in the sky. In those clouds, first a beautiful palace appeared, but it was destroyed in a short time. This incident gave him self-knowledge. He began to think that these perishable pleasures would surely destroy me while I am in this world. Does not a broken branch fall on the man standing on it? (45) Although I have filled this body with all desires or all desired objects, it is certain that it will leave me like a prostitute. Thinking this way, he became detached from the body. (46-48) He also thought that death occurs while life remains, and death does not occur when life does not remain. Therefore, those who fear death should first fear life. (49) The state of all wealth is like the Gandharvanagara, that is, just as this Gandharvanagara made of clouds is destroyed in the blink of an eye, so too are all the wealth of the world destroyed. This is known even to fools, let alone the wise. (50) When the Lord was thinking this way, the Lokantic Devas came and worshipped him. The Devas performed the auspicious ceremony of the Lord's departure. After that, the Lord Jitendiy, mounted on a palanquin called Hastachitra, came to the front garden. There, on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, he had the rising of his birth star in the evening. (51-52) He received initiation from the Jain kings on the sixth fast. He was known as the possessor of the supreme knowledge of the four truths, along with thousands of other famous kings. (53) Why do the seats of the gods tremble to serve him? (36) His supreme triad of jewels came in abundance from the past life, and what to speak of other virtues? The virtues of his intellect were also worthy of being described by the wise. (40)

Page #51:
---------------------------
## The Last Chapter

On the second day, the king, desiring food, entered Saketa (Ayodhya).  Indradutta, the king of Saketa, awaited him and offered him food and the five wonders. || 55 ||

Then, after eighteen years of silence in the state of *chhagrasthya*, he entered the *dikshavana* and sat in meditation under the *asan* tree, observing the *velaka* vow. || 55 ||

On the fourteenth day of the bright fortnight of *Pausha*, in the seventh *punarvasu* constellation, he attained *kevala jnana*, the supreme knowledge, and all the gods worshipped him. || 56 ||

He was worshipped by one hundred and three *gana-adhisha*s, led by *Vajranabha*, two thousand five hundred *purva-dharis* who had renounced attachment to the body, two lakh thirty thousand fifty teachers, nine thousand eight hundred *avadhi-jnani*s, sixteen thousand *kevala-jnani*s, nineteen thousand *vaikriya-kridhi* holders, eleven thousand six hundred fifty *manah-paryaya-jnani*s, and eleven thousand *prachanda-vadi*s. || 57-60 ||

Thus, he was the master of three lakh monks, accompanied by three lakh thirty thousand six hundred *aryikas* led by *Merushena*, and worshipped by three lakh *shravakas*. Five lakh *shravikas* praised him, countless gods and goddesses worshipped him, and countless *tiryanch*s served him. || 61-63 ||

Thus, the Lord Abhinandanatha, the leader of the twelve assemblies of the noble and the worthy, showered the dharma, wandering far and wide over the earth of this *aryakhanda*. || 64 ||

He reached Mount Sammed, wandering without desire. There, for a month, he remained in meditation, devoid of divine sound, engaged in the actions of *yoga-nirodha* etc. that occur during meditation, free from the two meditations of *samuchchhinna-kriya-pratipati* and *vyupara-kriya-nivarti*, perfectly pure, and holding the *pratima-yoga*. || 65 ||

From there, on the sixth day of the bright fortnight of *Vaisakha*, in the seventh *punarvasu* constellation, he attained liberation along with many monks. || 66 ||

At that time, Indra, with his eight limbs bowed in devotion, worshipped the Lord of the Three Worlds, praised him, and then departed for heaven in due course. || 67 ||

Page #52:
---------------------------
## The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

**Chapter 50: Abhinandan Swami**

**Verse 68:**
May the glorious Abhinandan Jinendra, who obtained the auspicious Lakshmi born from the five auspicious events by the Indras, who obtained the indestructible inner Lakshmi, shining with the four infinite qualities, and free from the destruction of karma, who, even without form, is the possessor of pure qualities, and who is embraced by the Lakshmi of liberation, whose rise is never extinguished, and who is endowed with all the aforementioned Lakshmis, always be victorious!

**Verse 19:**
May Abhinandan Swami, who was previously the king Mahabala of the city of Ranasanchay, then the victorious Ahminndra in the unparalleled Vimana named Vijay, and then the king of Ayodhya in the lineage of Rishabhanatha Tirthankara, protect you all.

**Verse 7:**
May Abhinandan Jinendra, who has divided all things by the two Nayas of certainty and practice, who has been praised with devotion by the gods to destroy the glory of his own existence, who is the lord of the three worlds, fearless, and who removes the fear of the beings of the world, be the cause of your prosperity, O noble beings!

Thus, in the collection of the Trishatti Lakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, the fifty-first chapter, narrating the Purana of Abhinandan Swami, is complete.

Page #53:
---------------------------
The Fifty-First Chapter

**Lakshmi, the Goddess of Wealth, is attained by those whose intellect is in accordance with the teachings of Sumatinatha.** May Sumatinatha, whose words are accepted by the virtuous, bestow upon us good intellect. ||1||

In the Akhanda Dhataki Khanda island, east of Mount Meru, in the Videha region, on the northern bank of the Sita river, lies the excellent country of Pushkalavati. ||2||

In its city of Pundarikini, there reigned a king named Ratishena. He was endowed with royal wealth and enjoyed his kingdom, acquired through the merit of past deeds, in accordance with righteous principles. His kingdom was free from enemies, devoid of anger, and constantly growing. ||3-4||

The royal wisdom of King Ratishena was unique and not found in other kings. He never employed the fourth branch of knowledge, Danda (punishment), which includes Anvikshiki (philosophy), Trayi (Vedas), and Varta (politics), because his subjects never strayed into the path of punishment, such as capital punishment. ||5||

The mental satisfaction derived from the objects of the senses is called Kama (desire). King Ratishena had no lack of Kama, as he possessed all the desired objects. ||6||

He accumulated wealth through the four means of acquisition, protection, increase, and expenditure, and considered Dharma (righteousness) as the supreme deity, according to the scriptures. He did not consider Kama as easily attainable as wealth and righteousness, meaning he prioritized the pursuit of wealth and righteousness over Kama. ||7||

Thus, King Ratishena, who ruled the earth playfully and fostered the growth of Dharma, Artha (wealth), and Kama, the three goals of life, in harmony with each other, one day had the following thoughts. ||8||

He pondered: "What brings about the welfare of a living being in this world? How can this being, dwelling in the cycle of births and deaths, escape the clutches of evil births and evil deaths and attain happiness? Happiness cannot be derived from Artha and Kama, as they only lead to the growth of the world. As for Dharma, it cannot bring happiness if it is tainted with the possibility of sin." ||9-10||

Page #54:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

11. "There is no other dharma than the dharma of the Jinas, and from it comes the supreme happiness." Thus, the thought of this renunciation arose in the heart of the king.

12. Having entrusted the heavy burden of the kingdom to his son, Atiratha, the king, who was destined to become a Jina, took upon himself the light burden of tapas.

13. He took initiation from the Arhanandan Jina, studied the eleven angas, and with the desire to conquer the enemy of delusion, he renounced attachment even to his own body.

14. He made a vow to become a Tirthankara, being endowed with the qualities of right faith, humility, and other causes for the attainment of the desired goal. For those who are wise, they act in such a way that leads to the attainment of their desired goal.

15. At the end of his life, he renounced the world, bound himself to the highest lifespan, and attained the position of Ahamindra in the Vaijayanta Vimana. There, his body had one arm raised.

16. He breathed once every sixteen months and fifteen days, and he took mental nourishment after thirty-three thousand years.

17. He possessed the white radiance, his brilliance extended to the limits of the universe, he could perform actions at that distance, and he had the power to uproot and throw away the universe.

18. The happiness of Ahamindra is the supreme happiness, it is free from duality, free from doubt, and free from attachment. The soul of King Ratishena attained this happiness.

19. When the time came for Ahamindra to take birth again, he was born in the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, in the city of Ayodhya, to King Megharatha. He was a Kshatriya, born in the lineage and gotra of Lord Rishabhadeva, free from enemies, and highly praiseworthy. Mangala was his queen, who was honored with great blessings like rain of jewels.

20. On the second day of the bright fortnight of Shravan, in the Magha Nakshatra, he saw sixteen dreams, including an elephant, and he saw an elephant entering his mouth. At that time, he entered the womb of the queen.

21. Knowing the meaning of the dreams from her husband, the queen was overjoyed.

22. Then, on the eleventh day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, in the ninth month, in the Chitra Nakshatra and Pitri Yoga, she gave birth to the soul of Ahamindra, the holder of three knowledges, the best among the righteous, and the lord of the three worlds.

23. As always, the Indra gods took the Jina child to Mount Meru, celebrated his birth festival, and brought him back to his body, giving him the name Sumati.

Page #55:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Seventh Chapter: The Supreme Festival

**25.** After nine lakh crore oceans passed, the Tirthankara, Suमतिनाथ, who was to be adorned, was born. His lifespan was also included in this period.

**26.** His lifespan was forty lakh Pūrvas, his height was three hundred Dhanus, his complexion was like polished gold, and his form was naturally beautiful.

**27.** He was nourished by all the things suitable for childhood, brought by the Devas. His body parts seemed like rays of the moon.

**28.** His hair was thin, curly, smooth, and had the luster of a Jamun fruit. It seemed as if the bees were gathered, fearing the lotus in his mouth.

**29.** After being anointed by the Devas, I received the kingdom of the three worlds. Thinking this, his forehead seemed to rise in height.

**30.** His ears, the holder of the three knowledges, were complete with all auspicious marks. Even after five years, he did not accept anyone as his teacher.

**31.** His eyebrows were very beautiful. The mere sign of his eyebrows satisfied the beggars with the wealth given by him. Therefore, the beauty of his eyebrows cannot be described even by the greatest scholars.

**32.** His two eyes, filled with infinite joy arising from seeing all desired objects, were playful, affectionate, and adorned with three colors: black, blue, and red.

**33.** His nose, which enjoyed the fragrance of the lotus-like mouth, seemed to rise up, as if it were proud, saying, "Without me, the beauty of the face cannot be."

**34.** The fortune of his two cheeks, being the support of the supreme limb (head) and being two in number, seemed to conquer the fortune residing on the chest.

**35.** The row of his teeth, conquering the beauty of the white lotus, was adorned as if Saraswati herself was laughing, being pleased with the lotus-like face.

**36.** His lips, which had tasted the seven tastes and had surpassed the beauty of the Sumeru mountain by rejecting all the Devas, did not have the name "Adhara" (inferior).

**37.** The beauty of his mouth, the beloved of speech, cannot be described. If the divine sound, which describes all things, emanates from him...

Page #56:
---------------------------
The beauty of his mouth, adorned with words, is beyond description.  If the words were to be described, they would be like the beautiful, playful, and radiant Saraswati. || 38 || What can be said about the beauty of his throat, which was adorned with the garland of the three worlds, worn by Indra, who had defeated all debaters with his Syadvada philosophy? || 39 || I believe that the peaks of his arms, rising above his head, were like the playful mountains of Lakshmi, who resides in his chest. || 40 || His victorious arms, reaching down to his knees, were like the arms of Vira-Lakshmi, spreading out to embrace the Earth-Lakshmi. || 41 || How can the beauty of his chest be described separately, when both Moksha-Lakshmi and Abhyudaya-Lakshmi reside there together? || 42 || His middle was not thin, even though it was thin, because it was adorned with Moksha-Lakshmi and Abhyudaya-Lakshmi, and it effortlessly carried the weight of his great body. || 43 || His navel, like a swirling vortex, was deep, and it need not be described, for if it were not so, his body would not be so beautiful. || 44 || All the good atoms thought, "We cannot attain form and beauty without a good shelter," and so they all came and resided on his waist, making it extremely beautiful. || 45 || The banana stalk and other objects may be used as comparisons for the thighs of other men, but they are merely objects of comparison in the presence of the thighs of Lord Sumatinatha, due to their roundness and other qualities. || 46 || Only I know why the Creator made his beautiful knees, and others do not know. It was so that there would be no envy between his thighs and his shanks. || 47 || The Creator made his shanks of iron, for how else could they bear the weight of his body, the Guru of the three worlds, even though he was thin? || 48 || Thinking, "This earth has come and rested beneath my feet," his two feet became like the back of a tortoise, bearing the auspicious radiance of joy. || 49 || So many Dharmas, which destroy karma, will manifest in this Lord Sumatinatha. The laws of the universe have been created to declare this. || 50 ||

Page #57:
---------------------------
**A One-Time Supreme Being**

The Creator fashioned ten fingers for him. ||50||

The nails on his feet gave rise to the suspicion that the moon, in order to attain a superior radiance, assumed ten forms and served his feet. ||51||

Thus, adorned with auspicious marks and features, his entire body was resplendent, and there was no doubt that the woman embodying liberation would accept him. ||52||

His childhood, by nature, was beautiful, even though he had not yet attained youth, he was more beautiful than Kamadeva himself. ||53||

Then, upon attaining youth, Kamadeva also found his place in him.  Indeed, who are the virtuous ones who, having attained a position, do not remain there themselves? ||54||

Thus, when ten lakhs of his previous births as a prince had passed, he received the kingdom of humans, rejecting the kingdom of heaven. ||55||

The Lord Sumatinatha, adorned with the white robe, never engaged in violence, nor did he speak falsehood, nor did he steal or possess.  Even in dreams, he never experienced the joy of these things.  Meaning: He was free from the four violent passions: the joy of violence, the joy of falsehood, the joy of stealing, and the joy of possession. ||56||

He never experienced unpleasant associations, nor did he experience the separation from what was dear to him, nor did he experience pain caused by suffering, nor did he ever engage in causing harm.  Thus, he was free from the four passions related to suffering. ||57||

Embracing virtues, accumulating merit through virtuous actions, and experiencing the results of all his past virtuous actions, he was the embodiment of virtues, merit, and happiness. ||58||

Always served by gods, vidyadharas, and humans filled with devotion, he had abandoned all worldly beginnings and was filled with all wealth. ||59||

He attained the supreme happiness in the enjoyment of desires, in the presence of humans and gods, in righteous wealth, and in beneficial dharma. ||60||

He delighted in the company of beautiful, equal-aged, and willingly-obtained women, adorned with divine body-paint, garlands, clothes, and ornaments. ||61||

Both divine Lakshmi and human Lakshmi, equally cherished with love, brought him happiness.  Indeed, who does not love a mediator? ||62||

Happiness in the world was that which was within the reach of his senses, for even in heaven, the essence of things was preserved by Indra for him alone. ||63||

Thus, passing time in the company of divine Lakshmi and the kingdom...

Page #58:
---------------------------
30
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
1
'How can a wise person, who desires a little happiness, be attached to the flesh of this world? If these beings of the world do not act like fish, they will not have to face the consequences of their sins.' || 65 || A foolish being, who has not attained the highest wisdom, may be engaged in harmful activities, but I, who am endowed with the three knowledges, how can I be engaged in harmful activities? || 66 || But how can there be stability in the true nature of the soul unless there is sufficient detachment and sufficient right knowledge? And how can there be happiness for one who is not stable in his true nature? || 67 || While ruling, when he had completed twenty-nine lakhs of previous births and twelve previous angas, he contemplated this in his own soul. || 68 || At that time, all the worldly gods, including Saraswati, praised him with beautiful hymns, the gods performed his abhisheka, and they carried his palanquin named Abhaya. || 69 || Thus, on the ninth day of the bright fortnight of Vaisakha, in the Magha constellation, in the morning, in the Sahetuka forest, with a thousand kings, Bhagwan Sumatinath took the vow of initiation with the rule of the time. Due to the influence of restraint, at that very moment, the knowledge of Manahparyaya arose. || 70-71 || The next day, he went to the city named Saumanasa for alms. There, King Padma, who had the radiance of gold, gave him food and received the honor of his presence. || 72 || He had taken the Samayika restraint, which is the cessation of all sins, he was silent, all his sins were pacified, he was very tolerant and patient, and he performed austerities with great care, which others could not bear. || 73 || He spent twenty years in seclusion. After that, in the same Sahetuka forest, under a Priyangu tree, he took the vow of yoga after observing a two-day fast. || 74 || And on the eleventh day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, when the sun was setting in the west, he attained Kevalgyan. || 75 || The gods worshipped his knowledge and auspiciousness. The immortal beings, including Amar, who possessed the seven riches, and one hundred and sixteen Ganadharas, constantly worshipped him, and two thousand four hundred previous Dharis were constantly with him.
1 This verse is not found in the G. book. 2 Animesha is a fish, it acts like that - Animeshayate 'Pathino Animesha Timi' - Dhananjay. 3 Para Praudim Vignatam Aprapto Moodha Praani Ahite - Hitakare Karya Aahit Aasakta Astu Bhavatu Kintu Bodhatrayena Yukto Aham Hitena Katha Maahit Ityacharyam. 4 Samyamashrayat G. 5 Prapte G. 6 Kevalyam Uppadivan L. 7 Pakshottrai L.

Page #59:
---------------------------
The Fifty-First Tirthankara, Suमतिनाथ, was adorned by eleven thousand Avadhijnanis, thirteen thousand Kevaljnanis, eight thousand four hundred Kriya-riddhi-dharis, ten thousand four hundred Manahparyaya-jnanis, and ten thousand four hundred fifty Vadīs, totaling three hundred twenty thousand munis. 

He was accompanied by three hundred thirty thousand Aryikas, including Anantamati, and was worshipped by three hundred thousand Shravaks and five hundred thousand Shravikas. 

He was constantly surrounded by countless Devas and Devis, and innumerable Tiryanchas. 

Suमतिनाथ, worshipped by the Devas, preached to the noble beings in eighteen Kshetras. Just as a seed sown in good soil yields great fruit, so too did Suमतिनाथ sow the seed of divine sound in the form of his teachings in all languages, both noble and ignoble, for the benefit of the noble beings, resulting in the attainment of the great fruit of the three jewels.

When his lifespan was reduced to one month, he ceased his travels and, accompanied by a thousand munis, took the Pratimāyoga on Sammed Shikhar. There, on the eleventh day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, in the Magha Nakshatra, in the evening, he attained Nirvana. The Devas celebrated his Nirvana Kalyanak.

He who was once the king of the city of Pundarika, Ratiṣeṇa, like Yama's punishment or Indra, who destroyed enemy kings, then became Ahmiṇdra in the Vaijayanta Vimana, and then became Suमतिनाथ, the Tirthankara, the holder of infinite wealth, endowed with all virtues, and accomplished. May he, who is full of all virtues, grant you Siddhi.

Page #60:
---------------------------
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
In the auspicious work of the descent of the Jina, the Sr̥gdhara, the Sayo was born.
He was called 'Sadyोजात' at the time of the Garbha Kalyanak festival, 'Vaama' at the time of the Janma Abhisheka adorned with ornaments made by the Indra's retinue, 'Aghora' at the time of the Diksha Kalyanak, 'Ishan' upon attaining Kevala Jnana, and 'Tatpurusha' at the time of Nirvana.
O Bhavyas, take refuge in this supremely venerable Lord Sumatinatha, devoid of attachment and aversion, for peace. || 87 ||
Thus, the fifty-first Parva, narrating the Puraana of Sumatinatha Tirthankara, is complete in the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana Sangraha, composed by Bhagavad Gunabhadracharya, known as Aarsha.
|| 51 ||
May everyone attain Siddhi. || 86 ||
1. Surpatirachitai - Dho, Ka.

Page #61:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Second Chapter

The lotus blooms only during the day and closes at night, therefore, it cannot remain stable. Just as the brilliance of the sun does not remain in the lotus due to its instability, similarly, Lakshmi also left the lotus and took refuge in the Jinas. May the Padma Prabhu, the Lord of the Lotus, protect us all. ||1||

In the second section of the Dhataki-khanda island, in the eastern part of Videha, on the southern bank of the Sita river, lies the Vatsa country. In its well-protected city, the undefeated Maharaja ruled. Maharaja Aparajita was truly undefeated, for no enemy could ever conquer him. He had conquered all his internal and external enemies. ||2-3||

This king conquered the cunning men with his own prowess. Therefore, the seven-limbed army of this king, adorned with physical strength, was merely an external show. ||4||

Due to his truthfulness, the clouds rained according to the wishes of the farmers, and all the grains sown at the beginning, middle, and end of the year yielded fruits. ||5||

Due to his generosity, the word "poverty" became like a flower in the sky, and those who were poor on earth began to behave like Kubera. ||6||

Just as good seeds sown in a fertile field produce other similar seeds, similarly, the three great qualities of this king produced other similar qualities. ||7||

This king's wealth, including his form, did not lead him astray, just as the one who uproots forests can also shake Mount Meru. This king of kings was adorned with the six qualities of diplomacy, war, etc., and these six qualities were adorned by him. His kingdom was not worthy of being oppressed or despised by others, but he himself was the oppressor and despiser of others. ||8-9||

Thus, he enjoyed the kingdom obtained through the merit accumulated in countless births for a long time, and it was divided among his good friends. ||10||

Then, reflecting on the impermanence of all things in the world, he thought, "All things are momentary, and happiness is experienced through the cycle of existence. How can the state of a work remain when its cause is destroyed?" ||11||

Thus, remembering all things as impermanent, he gave his kingdom to his son, Sumitra, who had conquered his mind, and went to the Jina, the teacher of asceticism, who had stopped the flow of karmic impurities. He became a Tirthankara, knowing the eleven angas. ||12-13||

Page #62:
---------------------------
Having abandoned the body after renouncing the world, I attained the position of Ahamindra in the delightful Urdhvagraivikya, riding a pleasant celestial chariot. || 14 || My lifespan was thirty-one oceans, my body two hands tall, my complexion was white, and I breathed every four hundred and sixty-five days. || 15 || After thirty-one thousand years, I was satisfied with mental food, and my brilliance, strength, and knowledge of Avadhi filled the seventh earth. || 16 || Thus, I enjoyed the happiness of Ahamindra, and at the end of my lifespan, I was ready to descend to earth. || 17 || At that time, in the city of Kaushambi on Jambudvipa, there was a great king named Dharana, a descendant of the Ikshvaku dynasty and belonging to the Kashyapa gotra. || 18 || His queen, Susima, was honored with blessings like rain of jewels. On the sixth day of the dark fortnight of Magha, when the stars Chitra and the moon were in conjunction, Queen Susima saw an elephant entering her mouth after seeing sixteen dreams, including an elephant. || 19 || Knowing the meaning of the dreams from her husband, she was overjoyed. || 20 || On the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight of Kartik, during the Tvastra yoga, she gave birth to an undefeated son, whose complexion was like a red lotus bud. || 21 || With his birth, virtues were born, the group of vices was destroyed, and all beings were freed from sorrow due to joy. || 22 || With the birth of the Lord, who guides the path to heaven and liberation, the enemy in the form of delusion became powerless and trembled, thinking, "Now I am destroyed." || 23 || At that time, wise people were discussing how many people would abandon the sleep of delusion when the Lord awakened them, how the innate opposition of beings would be destroyed, how Lakshmi would flourish, and how his fame would spread throughout the three worlds. || 24-25 || At that very moment, Indra went to Mount Meru, took the Lord, and bathed him with the water of the ocean of milk. He named him Padma Prabha with joy, praised him, and then brought him back to his mother's lap, danced with joy, and then departed for heaven. || 26-27 || Everyone praised his childhood with great joy, just like the moon. Who is that person who turns away from the ever-increasing Lord, who is the source of all auspiciousness? || 28 ||

Page #63:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Second Chapter

**21.**  If the object of desire is not a desire-object, nor is it something else, then it is not comparable to anything else.

**30.**  Similarly, one should not describe his form separately, because whatever qualities were present in him, the wise ones do not compare them to the qualities present in other beings.

**31.**  Women desire men, and men desire women. But both women and men desired him. This is because those with little fortune cannot attain his good fortune.

**32.**  Just as a swarm of intoxicated bees finds ultimate satisfaction in a mango blossom, so too, the eyes of all beings found ultimate satisfaction in his body.

**33.**  We believe that if all the pleasures of the senses were not fully present in Lord Padma Prabha, then they could not be fully present in any other beings with limited merit.

**34.**  When ninety thousand crore oceans of the Tirthankara lineage had passed, Lord Padma Prabha was born.

**35.**  He had a lifespan of three hundred thousand years, a body three hundred and fifty dhanus high, and the gods worshipped him. When one-fourth of his lifespan had passed, he attained universal sovereignty. His kingdom was inherited, passed down through generations. This is appropriate, because virtuous people do not desire a kingdom attained through other means.

**36.**  When Lord Padma Prabha was crowned, everyone felt as if they themselves were being crowned. In his kingdom, the eight great fears were completely eradicated.

**37.**  Poverty fled, wealth grew spontaneously, all auspiciousness manifested, and there was an abundance of all prosperity.

**38.**  At that time, generous people would ask, "What does this person desire?" and those seeking help would say, "No one desires anything."

**39.**  Thus, when Lord Padma Prabha attained sovereignty, the world seemed to awaken from a dream. This is because the kingdom of kings is that which brings happiness to the people.

**40.**  When sixteen parvangas and one hundred thousand years of his lifespan remained, he remembered his past lives due to the sight of an elephant tied at the gate. Being a knower of the true nature of things, he awakened the world from its slumber.

Page #64:
---------------------------
36
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the wise one who knows the Self, despises the cycle of birth and death, being detached from the objects of desire, which are the sources of sin and suffering. || 42 || What is unseen, untouched, unsmelled, unheard, and untasted by him, that he will experience as new? || 43 || What has been experienced is experienced again and again by the being, endlessly. What can be said to this being who is caught in the ocean of desire? || 44 || He cannot be satisfied by the senses, which are tainted by falsehood, etc., until the whole world is revealed in the use of his pure knowledge. || 45 || This body is the vomit of disease-like serpents, and this being sees that his loved ones are being destroyed by these disease-like serpents, yet he is still attached to this body. What a wonder! Has any being ever made love with life? || 46-47 || For him who considers violence, etc., as dharma, and the pleasure arising from the senses and objects as happiness, this world is pleasing, for he sees things in a contrary way. || 48 || That which destroys both the defilement of sin and virtue, the wise should always contemplate, practice, and study. || 49 || Thus, the Lord Padma Prabha, who has attained knowledge from the three-fold detachment of the world, the body, and enjoyment, was encouraged by the celestial beings, and the celestial beings of the four quarters performed the ceremony of his initiation and auspiciousness. He mounted a palanquin called Nivritti and went to the forest called Manohara, where he took the vow of the sixth fast, as if he were receiving instruction. || 50-52 || On the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight of Kartik, in the constellation Chitra, he received initiation, as if he were receiving instruction, with the respect of a thousand kings. || 52 || The wise one, Padma Prabha, who has attained the knowledge of the four truths, entered the city of Vardhamana on the next day for the practice. || 53 || King Somadatta, who is the holder of the white radiance, obtained the five wonders by giving him gifts. It is right, for what cannot be achieved by giving to the deserving? || 54 || With auspicious offerings, he collected the merit of the accumulated karma, and he performed the six austerities, including secrecy, etc., and became free from the cycle of birth and death. || 55 ||

Page #65:
---------------------------
The fifty-second parva, having spent six months in the state of *chhadmastha*, he destroyed the four *ghāti* karmas by ascending the *kshapika* श्रेणी. On the full moon day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, when the sun had declined from the meridian, he attained *kevala* knowledge in the *chitrā* constellation, being a benefactor to all beings.  ||56-57||

He was worshipped by one hundred and ten *ganadharas*, including Indra, who were endowed with *vajra*, *chamara*, etc. He was accompanied by two thousand three hundred *pūrvadhāris*, two lakh seventy-nine thousand *shikshakars*, ten thousand *avadhi* knowers, twelve thousand *kevala* knowers, sixteen thousand eight hundred *vidyā* endowed, ten thousand three hundred *manahparyaya* knowers, and nine thousand six hundred *uttara* debaters. Thus, in all, three lakh thirty thousand *munis* constantly praised him. Four lakh twenty thousand *āryikās*, starting with *rātrishenā*, praised him from all sides. Three lakh *śrāvakas*, five lakh *śrāvikās*, countless gods and goddesses, and countless *tiryachas* were with him. ||58-64||

Thus, by teaching the Dharma, he led the *bhavyas* to the path of liberation, and by the rise of *punya* karmas, he brought happiness to the *dharmatmas*.  The Lord *Padmaprbha* reached the summit of *Sammed* mountain. There he stayed for a month and practiced *yoga* restraint, and with a thousand *yatis*, he practiced *pratimā* yoga. ||65-66||

Then, on the fourth day of the dark fortnight of *Phalguna*, in the evening, in the *chitrā* constellation, he destroyed his karmas by the fourth *śukla* meditation, called *samuccchhinna-kriyā-pratipāti*, and attained *nirvāna*. At that time, Indra and other gods came and worshipped his *nirvāna* auspiciousness. ||67-68||

What is worthy of service? The feet of the Lord *Padmaprbha*, who has conquered the lotus and made even Lakshmi his own. What is worthy of hearing? The true words of the Lord *Padmaprbha*, which give rise to the understanding of all.

Page #66:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, what is the object of meditation and what is the essence of the pure lineage of qualities? It is said that the glorious Padma Prabha, the object of praise, may protect you all. ||65|| The king, who was previously the lord of the city of Susima, the conqueror of enemies, the undefeated, the one possessing great wealth, later, after taking up austerities, became the Tirthankara, the one who binds the karma of the Tirthankara, and became the final Aveyaka, the Ahamindra. Subsequently, in the city of Kaushambi, he became the sixth Tirthankara, the leader of the Ikshvaku dynasty, possessing infinite qualities, the benefactor of self and others. May that Padma Prabha, the lord, bless everyone. ||7|| Thus, in the collection of the Trishatti Lakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya, the account of the Purana of Padma Prabha, the fifty-second chapter, is complete. ||52||

Page #67:
---------------------------
## The 35th Chapter

He who has not defined the principles of soul, non-soul, being, non-being, etc., in a single form, yet he is the knower of them, such is Lord Suparshvanath, my Guru. || 1 ||

In the eastern part of Videha, in the Dhaatki Khand, on the northern bank of the Sita river, lies the country of Sukachchha. In its city of Kshemapura, King Nandipen ruled. || 2 ||

He was endowed with wisdom and valor, his followers were always devoted to him, and even destiny was always favorable to him. Therefore, his royal fortune brought happiness to all. || 3 ||

His body was not protected by physicians, nor his kingdom by ministers, yet both his body and kingdom were well-protected due to the rise of his virtuous deeds. || 4 ||

The three aims of human life, Dharma, Artha, and Kama, were all present in him, mutually supporting each other. This was the grace of that king. || 5 ||

This king, who had conquered his enemies, had a desire to conquer not only this world but also the next, by protecting the righteous path. || 6 ||

Thus, this glorious and wise king, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom with his relatives, friends, and servants, quickly became detached. || 7 ||

He began to think: "This living being, driven by the arising of delusion and attachment to the body and conduct, is bound by karma through the actions of mind, speech, and body, and is born in the four paths of existence." || 8 ||

Wandering in this endless cycle of birth and death, which is difficult to cross and filled with suffering, the destined soul, contaminated by suffering, may, by chance, obtain the time, etc., and attain the extremely difficult path of liberation. Yet, he is deluded and enjoys with women, etc. I am also like that, therefore, I am repeatedly condemned by the lustful. || 9-10 ||

It is a matter of sorrow that I, having destroyed all karma, become pure and upward-going, am not attaining the state of Nirvana, which is described by the omniscient. || 11 ||

Thinking thus, the king, with a noble heart, established his son, Dhanapati, a man of virtue, on his throne, and himself, along with many kings, 
|| 12 ||

* * *

**Note:** The text uses the term "मोहोदयोभयाविस्कायवाचिरावृत्तिभिः" which is a complex term. It is difficult to translate it directly into English. The translation above attempts to capture the meaning of the term by using the phrase "driven by the arising of delusion and attachment to the body and conduct."

Page #68:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that the one who possesses eleven Angas (parts of Jain scriptures) is eligible for liberation due to the causes mentioned. Accepting the names of the Tirthankaras, he renounced the world and attained liberation. || 14 ||

He was born in the middle of the Su-bhadra Vimana, a medium-sized aerial vehicle, with a white complexion and a body two hands tall. || 15 ||

He breathed once every four hundred and five days and lived for three zeros and three sets of three hundred years. || 16 ||

His powers of action, knowledge, strength, and peace extended to the earth, and his lifespan was twenty-seven oceans. After enjoying all pleasures, he was about to descend to the earth. || 17 ||

In this Jambudvipa, in the land of Kashi in Bharatavarsha, there was a city called Banaras. King Su-prati-shtha ruled there. Su-prati-shtha was born in the Ikshvaku dynasty of Lord Rishabhadeva. His queen was named Prithvi-she-na. || 18 ||

In the courtyard of Queen Prithvi-she-na's house, clouds in the form of gods rained excellent jewels for six months. On the sixth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada, in the Visakha constellation, she saw sixteen auspicious dreams and a white elephant entering her mouth. At that time, Ah-mi-ndra entered her womb. || 19 ||

Knowing the meaning of the dreams from her husband, Queen Prithvi-she-na was very happy. Then, on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of Jyeshtha, in the auspicious yoga of Agni-mitra, she gave birth to Ah-mi-ndra, a son who was as tall and strong as the elephant Airavata. || 20 ||

Indra celebrated his birth on the summit of Mount Meru, bowed his head at his feet, and named him Su-parshva. || 21 ||

After nine thousand crore years had passed since the time of Padma-prabha Jinendra, Lord Su-parshva-natha was born. His lifespan was included in that interval. || 22 ||

His lifespan was twenty lakh years in the past, and his body was two hundred dhanus (bows) tall. He shamed the moon with his radiance. In this way, he attained youth. || 23 ||

When five lakh years of his childhood had passed, he accepted the kingdom to give away his wealth like a generous person. || 24 ||

At that time, Indra was superior in eight qualities of intellect, such as service, and was proficient in all scriptures. He had countless groups of actors, dancers who were worth seeing and skilled in dancing, singers with excellent voices, musicians who played seven and a half types of instruments that were worth listening to, and people who were skilled in various arts and sciences, who were full of humor and wit. || 25 ||

He renounced all worldly attachments and became a disciple of the revered Arhanandan Muni with great joy, destroying his evil karma. || 12-13 ||

After that, he became the possessor of eleven Angas and formed a bond with the Tirthankara named Darshan-vishuddhi, etc., as mentioned in the Agamas. At the end of his life, he renounced the world and died in the middle of the Su-bhadra Vimana, a medium-sized aerial vehicle, and was reborn as Ah-mi-ndra. || 14-15 ||

He breathed once every four hundred and five days and lived for twenty-seven thousand years. || 16 ||

His powers of action, knowledge, strength, and peace extended to the earth, and his lifespan was twenty-seven oceans. After enjoying all pleasures, he was about to descend to the earth. || 17 ||

Page #69:
---------------------------
## The Tripañcāśattam Parva

**Verse 29:** The supreme lord of the Gandharvas, adorned with the qualities of Tara, brought with him the best of the Gandharva army and made the Lord happy with various forms of entertainment.

**Verse 30:**  The Lord of the Gods continuously provided the Lord with the best objects of the remaining three senses (touch, smell, and taste), apart from sight and hearing.  True happiness in the world is that which the Lord Supārśvanāth experienced.

**Verse 31:**  Due to the rise of auspicious karmas, eight extraordinary qualities manifested in him: freedom from perspiration, etc. He spoke words that were pleasing and beneficial to all, he possessed unparalleled strength without any worldly engagements, he was always joyful, his lifespan was imperishable (not subject to untimely death), he was the embodiment of virtues, merits, and happiness, his body was a source of welfare, he possessed the three knowledges (mati, śruta, and avadhi), his complexion was like the flower of the priyangu, his negative karma was extremely weak, his positive karma was extremely strong, and his neck was adorned as if with a garland of liberation, heaven, and worldly prosperity.

**Verse 32:**  The lotus faces of all the gods were reflected in the nails of his feet. Thus, the Lord Supārśvanāth, the holder of Lakshmi, the supremely knowledgeable one, was growing in the ocean of profound contentment.

**Verse 33:**  All the Tirthankaras, whose only remaining passions are anger, pride, deceit, and greed, related to the covering of the soul and the burning of the soul, attain the state of "desh-samyam" (control over the senses) after their initial eight years.

**Verse 34:**  Therefore, even though he had an abundance of objects for enjoyment, he controlled his mind, his conduct was regulated, and it was the cause of countless virtues.

**Verse 35:**  When his lifespan was reduced to one lakh minus twenty "pūrva-angas" (a unit of time), he saw the change of seasons and thought, "All things are impermanent."

**Verse 36:**  Due to the attainment of time, in his pure mirror of right knowledge, all the glory of his kingdom appeared like a play of shadows.

**Verse 37:**  I did not know that this kingdom was so quickly perishable and full of illusion. Shame on me, shame on me! Indeed, who are those people whose minds are blinded by the attachment to pleasures and do not get deluded?

**Verse 38:**  Thus, in the ocean of the Lord's mind, supreme self-knowledge arose like the moon. At that time, the celestial beings came and praised the Lord with appropriate words.

**Verse 39:**  Then, the Lord Supārśvanāth, mounted on a palanquin called "Manogati" (mind's journey), carried by the gods, went to the "Sahetuka" forest and there, on the sixth day of the bright fortnight of Jyeshtha, he observed a fast.

Page #70:
---------------------------
1. Manaḥparyayajñānam - Omniscience, the knowledge of the thoughts of others.
2. Pratīkṣya pratimāhya śrāpa lebhe, amarārcanam devakṛtapūjām - He waited and received the consecration, the worship performed by the gods.
3. Saṃmataḥ ko., kha., ga., 10 - Approved by ko., kha., ga., 10.
4. Niṣkriyaḥ ko., kha., ga., 50 - Inactive, according to ko., kha., ga., 50.

Page #71:
---------------------------
The fifty-fifth chapter (Tripañcāśattamam pave)

The supremely wise and skillful Jina Supārśvanātha, the Lord, subdued the massive army of evil enemies, who were fit to be eradicated by suffering, by remaining silent and fighting them, attained the status of Samvasarana for a while, eradicated the extremely wicked evil desires, and finally attained the state of Nirvana. May that supreme Lord Supārśvanātha bring us all, his acquaintances, close to him for a long time. ||55||

He who was previously the king of Kṣemapura, the lord of the city, and the praiseworthy Nandiṣeṇa in a previous birth, then performed austerities and became the middle of the nine Praveyakas, the Ahamindra. After that, he became the victorious Supārśva, the king of the Ikshvāku dynasty, in the city of Varanasi. May that seventh Tirthankara protect you all. ||56||

Thus ends the fifty-fifth chapter (Tripañcāśattamam pave) of the Triṣaṣṭilakṣaṇamahāpurāṇa, a collection of the Purāṇas of the Supārśvanātha Swami, composed by the venerable Guṇabhadra Ācārya, known as Ārṣa.

Page #72:
---------------------------
The one who, with his own brilliance, brought the entire assembly to a state of oneness, and purified them, may that pure Chandra Prabha be our purifier. || 1 ||

I bow to Chandra Prabha, whose body's radiance is like his speech, which brings joy and illuminates things, and who is surrounded by celestial stars in the sky. || 2 ||

The mere mention of his name destroys all the sins of beings, then why wouldn't his pure character, when heard, destroy them? Therefore, I will narrate his character, starting from the seventh Bhava. O Bhavy Shrenik! You should listen to it with faith. || 3-4 ||

Donation, worship, and other causes, if adorned with right knowledge, become the cause of liberation. And since that right knowledge arises from listening to this Purana, therefore, it is definitely worth listening to by those who desire their own good. || 5 ||

The Arhant Bhagwan has explained four types of Sutras through Anuyoga, among which Purana is the first Sutra! Bhagwan has revealed the order of listening from these Puranas. || 6 ||

The tongue that speaks, the ears that listen, and the mind that thinks, are the same for the Puranas of Bhagwan Rishabhdev and others, which preach the four Purusharthas (goals of life) - Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha. || 7 ||

In this middle Lok (world), there is a Pushkar Dweep (island). In the middle of it is the Manushottar Parvat (mountain). This mountain is round in shape like a ring, and it is the boundary of human movement. || 8 ||

In its inner part, there are two Sumeru mountains, one in the east and the other in the west. In the west of the eastern Sumeru, in the Videha region, on the northern bank of the Sitida river, there is a large country called Sugandhi. It is adorned with the qualities of a suitable fort, forest, ditch, mines, and grains that grow without being sown. || 10 ||

All the people in that country were divided into three varnas - Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra. They were full of affection, able to see subtle things, and were worth seeing, like a special kind of eye. || 11 ||

The farmers of that country were superior to the ascetics, meaning they surpassed them. Just as ascetics are righteous, meaning they have straightforward results, so too were the farmers there straightforward and simple. Just as ascetics are righteous, so too were the farmers righteous, meaning they were virtuous or they protected the Dharma of farming. || 12 ||

Page #73:
---------------------------
## Chapter Forty-Five

**13.** The reservoirs were extremely pure, comfortable to enjoy, filled with lotuses, capable of quenching thirst, deep, and captivating the mind and eyes.

**14.** The fields were like the king's treasury, for just as the king's treasury is filled with all kinds of grains, so too were the fields filled with all kinds of grains. Just as the king's treasury always satisfies everyone, so too did the fields always satisfy everyone. And just as the king's treasury is full of wealth, so too were the fields full of wealth in the form of grain, or they were "wealthy from all sides."

**15.** The villages were so close that even a rooster could fly from one to another. They were excellent, with many farmers, full of livestock, wealth, and grain. They were constantly bustling with activity and free from all kinds of troubles.

**16.** These villages were free from the burden of punishment and other obstacles, adorned with all kinds of wealth, filled with the four varnas and four ashramas, and emulated by the local people.

**17.** This land possessed all the characteristics of a good country as described by experts in the science of politics.

**18.** In that land, wealth was lost only when given to worthy recipients, not otherwise. The loss of a proper action occurred only when the fruit was obtained, not otherwise. The loss of progress occurred only in the place of humility, not otherwise. And the loss of life occurred only at the end of one's lifespan, not otherwise.

**19.** If there was any hardness in elevated objects, it was only in the breasts of women, not elsewhere. If there was any downfall, it was only in elephants, meaning their pride was their downfall, not that of other humans. Or if there was any downfall, it was only in trees that grew in caves and other low-lying places, not elsewhere.

**20.** If there was any punishment, it was only in the umbrella, the scales, or the city officials, not in the people themselves, meaning they were never fined. If there was any sharpness or intensity, it was only in the police officers and other officials, not in the people themselves.

Page #74:
---------------------------
46
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the twenty-ninth chapter, the word "Nistrinśa" was only used for swords, meaning that the sword was longer than thirty angulas (fingers). The word "Viśvāśitva" (omnivorousness) was only used for the "Anim" (a type of animal), not for the people. The word "Tāpaka" (heating) was only used for the sun, not for the people. And the word "Māraka" (killing) was only used for Yama (the god of death), not for the people. ||23|| Just as the sun resides only in the day, the word "Dharma" (righteousness) resided only in the Jain religion. This was the reason why there was no rise of "Ekānta" (extreme) doctrines, like owls. ||23|| In that country, there were forts, always in place, filled with machines, weapons, water, barley, horses, and protectors. ||24|| Just as there is a tilak (mark) in the middle of the forehead, in the middle of that country, there was a city called Śrīpura, filled with many auspicious places. That Śrīpura city, with all its beautiful things, seemed like a city of the gods. ||25|| With eyes like groups of blooming blue and red lotuses, and mouths like clean water-filled lakes, that city seemed to laugh at the beauty of enemy cities. ||26|| In that country, bees, drinking the sweet nectar of various flowers, enjoyed the pleasure of drinking and feasting with groups of bumblebees. ||27|| In that city, there were large, high, well-built houses, with the sound of mridangas (drums). It seemed as if the city was calling out to the clouds, saying, "Rest here." ||28|| It seemed as if that city was a mine of all things. If it were not so, why would they not be exhausted by continuous consumption? ||29|| Whatever was seen in that city was the best of its kind. Therefore, even the gods were confused, thinking, "Is this heaven?" ||30|| All the inhabitants of that city were born in good families, were virtuous, and had right faith. Therefore, after death, they were born in heaven, where there are eight kinds of happiness. ||31|| Thinking, "What is there in heaven? It is just like this," the people of that city, with their right faith, practiced Dharma for liberation, not for heaven. ||32|| In that city, wise people worshipped the Jina for auspiciousness during festivals and to remove sorrow during times of grief. ||33|| Just as goals are achieved by means, Jain doctrines, with their reasons, achieve their goals. They are the source of Dharma, wealth, and desires, and they bring immeasurable happiness. ||34||

Page #75:
---------------------------
The city was surrounded by a rampart, which seemed like a mountain of the human world, situated in the middle of the Pushkaravaradvipa. The rampart appeared as if the sun had hidden itself from the heat of its gems. || 35 || The king, named Srishena, was the lord of that city, who was like Indra in brilliance. His feet, like lotuses, were blooming in the water of the rays of the gems adorning the crowns of the bowing enemy kings. || 36 || Just as snakes become free from defects in the presence of a powerful mantra, similarly, all the people became free from defects when the victorious Srishena protected the earth. || 37 || He had carefully considered the means of diplomacy, charity, etc., and used them appropriately. Therefore, they yielded very abundant desired results, like a giver. || 38 || His wife was named Shrikantā, who was full of humility. She was like the speech of a good poet, because just as the speech of a good poet is free from defects like falsehood, etc., she was also chaste, i.e., devoted to her husband. And just as the speech of a good poet is characterized by soft and melodious words, she was also characterized by the placement of her soft feet. || 39 || Her beauty and other qualities were born in her, bringing happiness. Those qualities were worthy of being protected like a son and were worthy of being honored by the virtuous like a guru. || 40 || Just as the principle of Syādevakāra (the object is such due to some expectation) delights the mind of a wise person, similarly, the beauty and other qualities of his wife delighted the mind of her husband. || 41 || She was an ideal for other women, and it seemed as if the creator, in the form of Karma, had created a treasure chest of qualities to demonstrate his intelligence. || 42 || That couple, like divine couples, enjoyed supreme happiness, which was free from sin, imperishable, never-ending, and equally satisfying. || 43 || The king, being childless, was afflicted with grief and began to think to himself about having a child. || 44 || Women are like vines of the world, and excellent sons are like their fruits. If a man does not have sons, then what is the use of childless women for this sinful man? || 45 || What is the use of seeing the six-part lotus face, even if one has not seen the lotus face of a son due to fate? || 46 || He then approached the priest for advice on how to obtain a son. || 47 ||

Page #76:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana,
Eight auspicious things, including Bhṛngāra, were used to adorn the Jinabimba with eight Pratihāryas. || 48 ||
They were installed with the rituals described in the Pratiṣṭhākalpa, and a grand consecration was performed with the auspicious things of the Jina Sangama. || 49 ||
The queen herself bathed with fragrant water, along with the Jinas, and offered them praise. She performed the Ashṭāhnīka pūjā, which brings prosperity in this world and the next. || 50 ||
After a few days, the queen saw four dreams: an elephant, a lion, the moon, and Lakshmi. || 51 ||
At that very moment, she conceived. Gradually, she began to experience laziness, loss of appetite, drowsiness, and inexplicable nausea. || 52 ||
Her breasts, though long in time, were unable to win over each other, and their faces were becoming increasingly dark day by day. || 53 ||
To make it clear that modesty is the only adornment worthy of women, all her efforts were accompanied by modesty. || 54 ||
Just as the stars in the sky become sparse at the end of the night, her worthy ornaments became sparse due to her inability to bear the weight. || 55 ||
Her words were limited, like the wealth of a poor man, and they were heard intermittently, like the sound of a new cloud formation. || 56 ||
These signs of her pregnancy aroused curiosity among those around her. Some of them were visible, and some were not. || 57 ||
One day, the queen's chief maidservants went to the king with joy, bowed down, and whispered this news in his ear. Although the news was already evident from the maidservants' joyful faces, they still conveyed it. || 58 ||
Upon hearing the news of the pregnancy, the king's lotus-like face blossomed, just as a lotus blooms at sunrise and a kumuda at moonrise. || 59 ||
The birth of a son, who is like the moonrise for the ocean of the dynasty or like a tilak for adorning the family, brings joy to whom? || 60 ||
Even when the child is only in the womb, unseen, it brings me such joy. What will happen when I see its face? || 61 ||
Thinking this, the king, surrounded by his attendants, went to the queen's palace, his joy doubled. || 62 ||

Page #77:
---------------------------
## Chapter Forty-Five

The queen, who was like a treasure-filled earth, or the eastern sky with the rising sun, or the sun itself, was seen by the king, bringing joy to his eyes.  || 63 ||

Seeing the king, the queen tried to rise, but the king stopped her, saying, "O Queen, stay seated." || 64 ||

The king, sitting on the same bed with the queen, spent a long time in joy, conversing with her with appropriate words, and then, with a sense of shyness, departed. || 65 ||

After some days, as a result of past good deeds, or the auspicious position of the Guru, Shukra, and other auspicious planets, the queen gave birth to a son, just as the east gives birth to the sun, the autumn season gives birth to ripe grain, and fame gives birth to great renown. || 66-67 ||

The king's relatives, recognizing the auspiciousness of the son, whose fortune was growing and who was worthy of all prosperity, named him Shrivarma. || 68 ||

The birth of the son brought joy to the king, just as a swooning person finds joy in regaining consciousness, a poor person finds joy in receiving treasure, and a king with a small army finds joy in victory. || 69 ||

The radiance of the son's body made the lamps of jewels, whose brilliance had been extinguished, useless in the assembly hall at night. || 70 ||

The son's body grew according to the principles of medical science, and his intellect, which performed good deeds, grew according to the principles of grammar and other sciences. || 71 ||

Just as this Jambudvipa is adorned by the lofty Mount Meru, so too was this king, the protector of the earth, adorned by his excellent son, who was full of prosperity. || 72 ||

One day, the Jina, named Shri Padma, descended by his own will into the garden of the Shivaṅkara forest. Hearing this news from the forest guard, the king went seven steps in that direction, bowed his head, and then, with great humility, went to the Jina, circumambulated him three times, prostrated himself, and sat down in his proper place. The king asked the Jina about the nature of Dharma, learned the truth of things according to his teachings, quickly abandoned his desire for worldly pleasures, and devoted his mind to the desire for Dharma. He then gave his kingdom to his son Shrivarma and went to the abode of the Jina. || 73-76 ||

Page #78:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, Shri Varma, as instructed by the Jina, said, "The great darkness of false views is destroyed. The fourth stage of the path to liberation is called the 'sopana' (step). 77. In the presence of the fourth stage, the accumulation of virtuous karma naturally brings all desired objects close. Shri Varma obtained the desired happiness from those objects. 78. Once, on the full moon day of Ashadha, King Shri Varma, after worshipping the Jina, was sitting on the roof of his palace with his loved ones. 79. Seeing a meteor shower, he became detached from worldly pleasures. He gave his kingdom to his eldest son, Shrikanta, and took initiation from Shri Prabha Jina. He practiced austerities for a long time and finally renounced the world on Mount Shri Prabha. 80-81. As a result, he became a god named Shri Dhar in the Shri Prabha celestial abode in the first heaven. He had a lifespan of two oceans. 82. He possessed the eight powers, including levitation and invisibility. He was seven cubits tall, had a subtle body, was golden-colored, breathed once a month, and consumed mental food made of amrita-like particles every two thousand years. He was satisfied with his bodily functions and had knowledge extending to the first earth. His strength, radiance, and power also extended to the first earth. He enjoyed the happiness that resulted from the ripening of his virtuous karma. 83-85. In the eastern part of the Dhataki-khanda island, south of the Ishvakara mountain, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a prosperous country called Alka. In it was the excellent city of Ayodhya. In that city, King Ajit-anjay was adorned. His queen, Ajit-sena, was the giver of sons. 86-87. One day, she worshipped the Jina for the sake of obtaining a son. That night, she dreamt of eight auspicious things: an elephant, a bull, a lion, the moon, the sun, a lotus-filled lake, a conch shell, and a full pot. She asked King Ajit-anjay about the meaning of these dreams. The king said, "My dear queen, the elephant signifies that you will have a son. 88-89. The bull signifies that your son will be of a serious nature. The lion signifies that he will be endowed with infinite strength. The moon signifies that he will be pleasing to all. The sun signifies that he will be full of radiance and power. The lake signifies that he will be a king. The conch shell signifies that he will be victorious. The full pot signifies that he will be prosperous. 90-91.

Page #79:
---------------------------
The 51st chapter

The one who has thirty-two auspicious marks, including the conch and the wheel, will be a Chakravarti by seeing the conch, and the master of treasures by seeing the full pot. || 91 || The queen, knowing the fruit of the dream, was very pleased. After that, after a few months, she gave birth to the aforementioned Shridhardeva. The king named this son, who was a conqueror of enemies, Ajit Sena. || 92 || The king was adorned by that brilliant son, just as a dust-free day is adorned by the sun. Indeed, such a son is the ornament of the family. || 93 || The next day, the Tirthankara named Swayamprabha came to the Ashoka forest. The king, along with his family, went there, worshipped him, praised him, listened to his Dharma-upadesha, and, giving his kingdom to his son Ajit Sena, who had conquered his enemies, he took to the path of self-control and became a Kevali himself. || 94-95 || On the other hand, the queen, filled with love, subdued the young Ajit Sena, so that he, even in his youth, began to experience the pleasures of adulthood. || 96 || Due to the ripening of his virtuous deeds, all the materials, animate and inanimate, that are produced for the Chakravarti, including the wheel-jewel, were produced. || 97 || His wheel-jewel, which conquered all directions, appeared. With the appearance of the wheel-jewel, conquering the directions became as easy for the victorious one as walking outside the city. || 98 || No one was unhappy because of this Chakravarti, and although he was the lord of six continents, he had no attachment to possessions. Indeed, virtue is that which binds virtuous deeds. || 99 || In his kingdom, the people suffered due to their own evil deeds, and they enjoyed happiness due to the proper protection of the king. This was the reason why the people praised him. || 100 || His elevated command shone, eclipsing the rays of the jewels that adorned the crowns of the gods and the kings of the Vidyadharas. || 101 || If the sun, which rises constantly and delights the lotuses, does not have its power, how can Indra, even being the lord himself, protect his direction? || 102 || The creator must be foolish, because if he were not foolish, why would he appoint Agni to protect the southeastern direction? After all, has anyone ever been protected by one who burns his own creator? || 103 || Does the creator not know that Yama is a protector or a destroyer? Yet, he appointed him, thinking that he would protect the sinners. || 104 ||

Page #80:
---------------------------
The one who resides in the place of dogs, is poor, always near Yama, and even in his own life is doubtful, how can such a Nairṛta protect anyone? ||1.5|| The one who dwells in the water, like a crocodile, with a noose in his hand, who loves water (or, who loves the foolish), and who is the refuge of the river (or, who is not the refuge of the poor), how can such a Varuna protect the people? ||106|| The one who is a friend of smoke and fire, is unstable himself and drives others, the creator made him the protector of the Vāyavya direction, how can such a Vāyu stay anywhere? ||107|| The greedy one cannot gain merit, and the one who is devoid of merit, how can he be a protector? If Kubera gives wealth, even then, how can he be a protector, being a secret keeper? ||108|| Īśāna has reached the last stage, his count is the last, he is surrounded by ghosts and is wicked, how can he be the lord of the direction? ||1.9|| It seems that the creator made all of them the protectors of the directions due to their mental deficiency, and because of this, he had to bear a lot of disgrace. Now, it seems that the creator made this one, Ajitasena, capable of protecting all the directions, to remove all his disgrace. ||110|| By creating this garland of noble words, everyone praises him, and he, who has conquered all the directions with his valor, surpasses Indra and other gods. ||111|| His wealth is for giving in charity, his intellect is for religious deeds, his valor is for protecting beings, his life is for happiness, and his body is for enjoyment, and all of these are constantly increasing. ||112|| His merit is not dependent on others, it is never destroyed, and there is no obstacle in its growth. Thus, being free from desire, he nourishes his virtues and enjoys happiness with happiness. ||113|| Truth is in his speech, compassion is in his mind, purity is in his religious deeds, and he protects his subjects like his own virtues, so why shouldn't he be a king-sage? ||114|| I believe that kindness is his natural quality. If it were not so, then why wouldn't he be affected by the wickedness of the sinful enemy who takes lives? ||115|| In his kingdom, there is no one who eats the capital, nor is there anyone who is extremely miserly, and all are spendthrifts. ||116||

Page #81:
---------------------------
In the forty-fifth Paryushana, when the king ruled the earth with a just kingdom, the people, considering him as the Lord of beings, prospered with good intellect. || 117 || When he attained the age of youth, fourteen jewels and nine treasures appeared due to the rise of his past good deeds. || 118 || He experienced ten enjoyments: vessels, food, bed, army, vehicle, seat, treasure, jewel, city, and drama. || 119 || That king, endowed with faith and other virtues, once gave food to a monk named Arindama, who was observing a month-long fast, and thus bound himself with new merit. He also received miraculous blessings like rain of jewels. It is indeed right, for what is impossible for those who are devoted to doing good deeds? || 120-121 || The next day, the king went to the beautiful garden called Manohara to worship the Jinesvara, Guṇaprabha. There, he drank the nectar of the supreme Dharma, as spoken by the Jina, and heard about his past lives. Inspired by this, like a brother, he quickly attained dispassion. He gave the kingdom to his son, Jitashatru, and became eager to conquer the king of delusion, the conqueror of the three worlds. Along with many kings, he took up the practice of austerity. || 122-124 || After practicing this non-transgressive austerity, he left his body at the end of his lifespan on the peak of the mountain called Nabhastilaka, and became Achyutendra in the Shantakar Vimana of the sixteenth heaven. There, his lifespan was twenty-two Sagaras, he was three hands tall, and his body was radiant, free from metals and sub-metals. He had a white complexion, breathed once every eleven months, and took mental nourishment once every twenty-two thousand years. His eyes, like the knowledge of the limits of the earth, could see up to the sixth earth. His appropriate radiance, strength, and subtle body could also extend up to the sixth earth. || 125-128 || Thus, Achyutendra, who held the right faith, enjoyed the pleasures of heaven for a long time. At the end of his lifespan, he was born in the following place, as they say: || 129 || In the eastern part of the Dhataki-khanda island, on the right bank of the Sita river, there was a country called Mangalavati. In its city of accumulated jewels, the king Kanakaprabha ruled. His queen was named Kanakmala. Ahamindra, giving his message through auspicious dreams of these two, was born as their son named Padma-nabha. || 130 ||

Page #82:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Padmanabha was born to them, and he grew up well, nurtured with special care suitable for a child.  || 13 ||  Having attained perfection in all qualities like usefulness and forgiveness, the king initiated him into the Vidya Griha (house of learning). || 132 ||  He, surrounded by noble companions, banished servants, elephants, and others, and set out to learn all knowledge. || 133 ||  He controlled his senses in such a way that they, through their objects, only fostered love for the soul. || 134 ||  That wise one sought the company of elders to increase his humility.  Humility, as defined by scriptures, is artificial, while natural humility is innate. || 135 ||  Having attained all arts, and possessing both natural and artificial humility, the king, like the moon, was adorned by the preceptors Guru and Shukra. || 136 ||  That wise one, at the age of sixteen, shone with youth, like a forest adorned by a virtuous, self-controlled, and sense-conquered being. || 137 ||  Seeing his son, endowed with beauty, lineage, age, and education, and free from vices, the father was overjoyed. || 138 ||  He performed the worship of knowledge for him, preceded by the worship of the Jina, and employed his intellect in other activities, like a polished gem. || 139 ||  Like a young moon, perfected by the arts and the influence of the bright fortnight, the powerful king filled him with many wives. || 140 ||  He had daughters like Somaprabha, etc., and sons like Suvarnabha, etc., who were auspicious, like the rays of the sun. || 141 ||  Surrounded by sons, grandsons, etc., the glorious and wise king, Kanakaprabha, ruled his kingdom happily, while others were engrossed in worldly affairs. || 142 ||  One day, in the beautiful forest of Manohara, he heard the nature of Dharma from the Jina king, Shridhara, and relinquished his kingdom to his son, embracing restraint and gradually attaining liberation. || 143 ||  Padmanabha also took the vows of a devotee in the presence of the same Jina king, and, with his ministers, continued to rule the kingdom...

Page #83:
---------------------------
## The Forty-Fifth Chapter

With gentle touches of playful laughter,
With charming glances, full of delight,
With sweet whispers of love,
And with the beauty of blooming flowers,
He found joy in the heart.

The ripe fruit of the wish-fulfilling tree,
Born of love,
Was the limit of his detachment,
Brought about by the love of Rama.

This is the fruit of the good deeds of his past lives,
He clearly explained to the foolish,
And thus, the radiant Padmabh was happy.

Knowing the nature of Dharma,
In the presence of Shridhar Muni,
The wise Padmabh contemplated
The true nature of the world and liberation.

As long as the Audayik Bhava remains,
So long does the soul wander in the world.
The Audayik Bhava remains as long as Karma remains,
And Karma remains as long as its causes remain.

The causes of Karma are five:
Mithyatva, Asamyam, Pramad, Kshaya, and Yoga.
Where Mithyatva exists,
The other four causes are sure to exist.

Where Asamyam exists,
There are also Pramad, Kshaya, and Yoga.
Where Pramad exists,
There are also Yoga and Kshaya.
Where Kshaya exists,
There is also Yoga.
And where there is no Kshaya,
Only Yoga remains as the cause of bondage.

With the destruction of Mithyatva and other causes
In their respective Gunasthanas,
The bondage caused by them is also destroyed.

First, Satya, Bandha, and Uday are destroyed,
Then, the Karmas are destroyed in their own time,
Up to the fourteenth Gunasthana.
With the destruction of Karmas,
The world is destroyed.

When the world,
Which is characterized by sin and birth and death,
Is destroyed,
The soul remains with its Kshayik Bhavas.
At that time, the soul grows with those Kshayik Bhavas.

Not knowing this truth,
As taught by the Jinas,
This being, whose end is very difficult to attain,
Has been wandering in the forest of the world,
Like a blind man, for a long time.

Now, I abandon all the causes of Karma-bondage,
Such as Asamyam, etc.,
And I attain, I hold,
The five limbs of liberation,
Such as pure faith.

Page #84:
---------------------------
56
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Knowing the true nature of good and bad, Padmaabha gave the sovereignty of external wealth to Suvarnaabha. [158]
Along with many kings, he took initiation and practiced the four types of well-known means of liberation. [159]
He became a Tirthankara, contemplating the sixteen causes - the thoughts, and became a master of the eleven angas, thus binding the karma of a Tirthankara. [160]
He performed difficult austerities like the lion's play, which ignorant beings cannot perform, and at the end of his life, he shed his body after attaining Samadhi. [161]
He became Ahamindra, the possessor of thirty-three sagara lifespan in the Vaidyuta Vimāna. [162]
The characteristics of his body, like the leshya, were as described before. He enjoyed divine happiness. [162]
After that, when six months of his lifespan remained, there was a city called Chandrapura in the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa. [163]
In that city, a king named Mahaseana, belonging to the Ikshvaku dynasty and the Kashyapa gotra, ruled with extraordinary splendor. [163]
His queen was named Lakshmana. Lakshmana received a stream of jewels showered by the gods in her own house. [164]
She was surrounded by the goddesses Shri, Hri, etc. The queen, who enjoyed the pleasures of divine garments, garlands, ointments, and beds, was pleased after seeing sixteen dreams on the fifth day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra. [165]
At sunrise, she got up, adorned herself with beautiful clothes and ornaments, and with a happy face, told her husband, who was sitting on the throne, about all her dreams. [166]
The king Mahaseana, knowing the fruits of those dreams through his knowledge of the past, present, and future, explained them separately to the queen, who was very happy to hear them. [168]
The goddesses Shri, Hri, Dhriti, etc. constantly increased her beauty, modesty, patience, fame, intelligence, and good fortune. [169]
After many days, on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of Pausha, she gave birth to the son of Ahamindra, who was worshipped by the gods, possessed inconceivable radiance, and was endowed with the three knowledges, in the Shakrayoga. [170]
At that very moment, Indra came and placed the said Jina-child on the throne situated on the peak of Mount Meru, bathed him with the water of the Kshirasagara, adorned him with all kinds of ornaments, put the necklace of the kingdom of the three worlds around his neck, and then happily showered him with thousands of

Page #85:
---------------------------
## The Forty-Fifth Chapter

177. ||
Adorning himself with all ornaments, and binding the garland of the three worlds, the Thousand-Eyed One, with joy, looked upon the earth for the sake of worldly fame. || 172 ||

173. ||
How did this lotus-like earth bloom at his birth? Because, from everywhere, the Lord, known as the "Maker," bestowed upon it the auspicious name "Chandra Prabha." || 173 ||

174. ||
The Lord of the Gods, Indra, performed the joyous play of "Anand Natak" for him. Then, bringing him back, he entrusted him to his parents, the rulers of the world. || 174 ||

175. ||
"Serve the Lord with all the things that are fit for enjoyment and enjoyment," thus instructing the Yaksha King, Indra went to his own abode. || 175 ||

176. ||
Even though the wise consider a woman to be a source of blame, this Lakshmana, who holds the Lord of the world, the benefactor of the world, is very virtuous, very pure. Thus, the gods praised her and attained great merit. The goddesses also accepted that "such a woman is the best." || 176-177 ||

178. ||
After the liberation of Lord Suparshvanath, when nine hundred crore sagaras had passed, Lord Chandra Prabha was born. His lifespan was also included in this interval. || 178 ||

179. ||
His lifespan was ten lakh purvas, his body was one hundred and fifty dhanushas tall, he was growing like the moon of the second fortnight, and the whole world praised him. || 179 ||

180. ||
"Oh Lord, come here," thus, out of curiosity, a goddess called out to him. He placed his palms, like lotuses, on her outstretched hands. At that time, his lotus-like face, with a smile that arose without any reason, looked very beautiful. Sometimes, he would stumble and place his foot on the earth adorned with jewels. || 180-181 ||

182. ||
Thus, with innocent and pure actions, befitting that stage, he spent his childhood and attained the stage of youth, desired by those who seek happiness. || 182 ||

183. ||
At that time, people there, out of curiosity, would say, "We believe that the Creator has made his body from nectar." || 183 ||

184. ||
His "dravya leshya," the radiance of his body, shone so brightly, surpassing the radiance of the full moon, as if the "bhava leshya," the radiance of his emotions, had come out due to the abundance of external objects. Meaning: His body was white, and his emotions were also white and radiant. || 184 ||

185. ||
His fame and radiance eclipsed the brilliance of the celestial beings. The land of enjoyment, the sun, was eclipsed by the rays of the moon. || 185 ||

Page #86:
---------------------------
58
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, his radiance, like the combined brilliance of the sun and moon, shone brightly. I believe that lotuses and lilies always bloomed in his presence. || 186 || His qualities, like the laughter of the jasmine, were pure, like the rays of the moon. They blossomed the lotus-like minds of the noble ones. || 187 || Lakshmi was born with him, so she was his sister. This is the truth, but ignorant people have falsely imagined that Lakshmi is the sister of the moon. || 188 || Just as the world rejoices, becomes beautiful, and flourishes when the moon rises, so too, the world rejoices, becomes beautiful, and flourishes when the Lord Chandra Prabha, who removes all suffering, is born. || 189 || I believe that his pure fame and fortune are due to his qualities. If the saying "action follows cause" is true, then it must be accepted that his fortune and fame were pure because of his pure qualities. || 190 || He, who is endowed with great power, who is adorned with auspicious acts like bathing, and who is decorated with ornaments, sometimes played the melodious vina, sometimes sang with mridanga and other instruments, sometimes looked at the ornaments and clothes brought by Kubera, sometimes examined the arguments presented by debaters, and sometimes, out of curiosity, granted darshan to the noble beings who came to see him. Thus, he spent his time. || 191 || When he was still a child, his qualities like dharma increased, and his vices like papa were destroyed. What to say when he attained restraint? || 194 || Thus, after two hundred and fifty thousand years had passed, he received his coronation, and he appeared very joyful and beautiful. || 195 || What is the use of the sun's brilliance, which cannot protect itself from the Rahu, whose disc is the size of his palm? The brilliance belongs to this Lord Chandra Prabha, who protects the three worlds. || 196 || If even Indra and other gods accept servitude before his birth, then how can this Lord Chandra Prabha, who is surrounded by other glories like wealth, be compared to anyone else? || 197 ||

Page #87:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Fourth Chapter
56
He was happy, like a giver, in the enjoyment of his own face, for the sake of the eager, beautiful, and curious women. || 199 || There was no obstacle for him in seeing the lotus-face of his beloved, except the hovering of the bees, fearing the lotus-flower. || 200 || What is impossible in the world, when even the fickle, thirsty, and indiscriminate, and impure bees (drunkards) can enter? || 201 || Thus, enjoying the wealth of the kingdom, when their six lakh fifty thousand previous and twenty-four previous births' long time passed like a moment, they were one day looking at their lotus-face in the mirror in the house of ornaments. || 202-203 || There, having determined the cause of dispassion to be something on the face, they began to think: "Look, this body is perishable, and the pleasure derived from it is also like that, painful." || 204 || What is the happiness that does not arise from one's own soul? What is the wealth that is fickle? What is the youth that is perishable? And what is the life that is finite? || 205 || What is the association with relatives, if it is followed by separation? I am the same, the objects are the same, the senses are the same, the pleasure and experience are the same, and the activity is the same, but all this changes again and again in this world. || 206-207 || I know what has happened in this world and what is going to happen, yet I am repeatedly falling into delusion, which is strange. || 208 || I have been considering the impermanent as permanent, remembering the sorrow as happiness, considering the impure as pure, and knowing the other as the self. || 209 || Thus, afflicted by ignorance, this being, whose end is very difficult, has been suffering for a long time in the ocean of the world, by the four kinds of great sorrows and terrible diseases. || 210 || Thus, having obtained the opportunity of time, they were distressed, as if they were troubled by the desire to leave the path of the world, by means of long and virtuous deeds. || 211 || Remembering the eternal truth, they were eager to attain the knowledge of the self, the liberation of the soul, and the fruits of their good deeds. || 212 ||

Page #88:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

The auspicious wisdom, the giver of perfection, was attained by her own accord. Thus, the enlightened ones, restrained by the gods, surrendered to her. || 213 ||

Having praised appropriately, they returned to the Brahma world. The king, having performed the coronation of his son, Varachandra, || 214 ||

Attained the auspiciousness of the exit ceremony, performed by the gods. He ascended the palanquin, Vimala, carried by the celestial beings. || 215 ||

Having fasted for two days in the forest, Sarvartuka, on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of Pausha, in the Anuradha constellation, || 216 ||

The king, with a thousand others, attained the state of Nirmanthya. On the second day, in the city of Nalin, || 217 ||

The king, Somadatta, of fair complexion, gave him excellent food. Having received nine kinds of merit, he obtained the five wonders, including the earth. || 218 ||

The gods, pleased with the gift, bestowed upon him the desired boon. He, having taken the vows and protected the five assemblies, || 219 ||

Having conquered the enemy of passions, the one who is constantly increasing in purity, the one who is possessed of three secrets, the one who is virtuous, the one who is endowed with qualities, the one who is praised for his two austerities, || 220 ||

Contemplating the nature of things, actions, and words, through the inner connection, || 221 ||

Remembering the impermanence, impurity, and suffering of the body and other things, he attained the supreme yoga, by practicing equanimity everywhere. || 222 ||

Having spent three months according to the Jina-kalpa, he stood under the Naga tree in the Dikshavana, observing the vow of fasting for six days. || 223 ||

On the seventh day of the dark fortnight of Phalguna, in the afternoon of Anuradha, || 224 ||

He attained the क्षपक श्रेणी, due to the combination of the three karmas, with his fourth subtle saṃpārāya charitra shining forth, both in terms of substance and essence. || 225 ||

Having destroyed the enemy of delusion, through the power of the first शुक्लध्यान, his right faith became firm and unshakeable. || 226 ||

Remembering that I should be enriched with the qualities of Kevala Jnana, etc., he approached the Samagam with the auspicious wisdom, like a messenger. || 212 ||

Page #89:
---------------------------
## Chapter Forty-Five

The second white meditation destroyed the three types of karmas, namely, **ghātiya** karmas, leaving only the **upayoga** karma. This **upayoga** karma is unique to the soul, as it is not found in any other substance.  The **ghātiya** karmas are called so because they destroy the **upayoga** karma. These karmas are **jñānāvaraṇa**, **darśanāvaraṇa**, **moha**, and **antarāya**.  The **ghātiya** karmas of the Lord were destroyed, and many **aghātiya** karmas were also destroyed. Thus, the Lord attained the state of **samyak-darśana**, **cāryānta**, **kṣāyika jñāna**, **darśana**, and **jñāna**, along with the five **labdhi**s, becoming a **sa-yoga kevalī jina** with his body.

He was **sarvajña** (omniscient), the master of all realms, the benefactor of all, the sole protector of all, **sarvadṛk** (all-seeing), worshipped by all the **indra**s, and the teacher of all things.

His extraordinary magnificence was manifested through thirty-four **atiśaya**s, and the **tīrthankara** karma was revealed through eight **prātihārya**s.

He was the **deva-deva** (god of gods), whose lotus feet were adorned by the crowns of all the **indra**s. He filled the entire universe with his radiance and was the ornament of all realms.

The **jina** Chandra Prabha, the glorious one, resided in the sky, enlightening the world with his knowledge of **gati**, **jīva**, **samāsa**, **guṇasthāna**, **naya**, **pramāṇa**, and other vast subjects.

His throne, adorned by lions, shone brightly, as if the lions of his lineage, who had accumulated great sins through their cruelty and valor, had lifted the throne to atone for their past deeds.

The radiance of his body illuminated all directions, as if the brilliance of his **kevalajñāna** had taken a physical form.

He was served by divine **camaras** (fly whisks) as white as the wings of swans, as if the waves of the Ganges were attending to him.

His single divine sound, like the rays of the sun, illuminated all things for those who saw and heard him.

His three **śiva**-like **pada**s (steps) shone brightly, as if the path to liberation, in the form of **samyak-darśana**, **samyak-jñāna**, and **samyak-cārya**, were saying, "Liberation can be attained only through us, not through anything else."

The red **aśoka** tree shone brightly, as if it were seeking refuge in the Lord, or as if it were blossoming with love for him.

Page #90:
---------------------------
62
From the sky, a shower of flowers fell upon the glorious one, like a row of stars, filled with devotion. ||24|| The divine drums of the gods resounded, conquering the ocean of delusion. The directions heard the victory of the Lord over the enemy of delusion. ||24|| In the midst of his radiance, his face shone with joy, like a lotus in the celestial Ganges, or like the image of the moon. ||242|| In the midst of the fragrant bower, he was adorned with the four virtues, surrounded by the twelve assemblies, like the autumn moon surrounded by stars. ||243|| The sixty-two Ganadharas, the two thousand Purvadharis, the eight thousand Avadhijnanis, the two hundred and four hundred Shikshak, the ten thousand Kevalajnani, adorned with the fourteen thousand Vikriya-Riddhi-bearing monks, served by the eight thousand Manah-Payeya-Jnani, the masters of the seven thousand six hundred Vadi, all the monks numbered two hundred and fifty thousand. The three hundred and eighty thousand Aryikas, beginning with Varuna, praised him. Three hundred thousand Shravakas and five hundred thousand Shravikas worshipped him. He was praised by countless gods and goddesses, and served by countless Tiryanchas. ||243-248|| All these beings of the twelve assemblies, surrounding the glorious Lord Chandraprabha, were standing in a circle, each in his own chamber, with his hands folded like the bud of a lotus. ||249|| At that time, the second Aishaneendra, humbled by the weight of devotion that had arisen, and whose jewel on the crown of his head was shining brightly, began to praise him. ||250|| He said, "O Lord, you have attained the supreme Triratna by the Triratna. Grant me also the wealth of the Triratna." ||251|| "O God, the glory of the ocean and Mount Meru is only for themselves, and the glory of the Kalpavriksha is only for others. But your glory, O Great One, is for both yourself and others." ||252|| "You are the giver of supreme happiness. Your praise is far beyond, and you are always prosperous, having attained the wealth of your own true nature." ||253||

Page #91:
---------------------------
## Chapter Forty-Five
### 63

The one who holds your words in their speech, your Dharma in their heart, and your conduct in their body, becomes like you and attains supreme bliss. ||254||

O Lord! You alone, with the sword of pure awareness, have destroyed the enemies of karma, who hate the three worlds, and have won the kingdom of liberation. ||255||

O Master! Those who take refuge in the dense shade born from your lotus-like feet, are far removed from the scorching heat of the sun of sin, the disease of karma, and the intense suffering of sorrow. ||256||

O God! This world is like an endless ocean or an infinite forest for all beings, but for the fortunate ones who take refuge in your teachings, it is like the hoof of a cow or the Nandana forest. ||257||

O Bhagavan! Although remembering your feet may cause some distress, the fruit of it is the kingdom of the three worlds. It is surprising that these worldly beings have such a weak desire for that great fruit, which shows that they do not know the welfare of their own soul. ||258||

O Lord! Your relationship of being the support and the supported is unique and unparalleled, because this world, which resides below, is the supported, and you, who reside above, are the support. Meaning: The thing that resides below is called the support, and the thing that resides above is called the supported, but your arrangement of support and supported is different from this arrangement, hence it is unparalleled. On the other hand, this means that you are the protector of the world, hence the support, and the world is the subject of your protection, hence the supported. ||259||

You know everything, but you are not known by anyone. You are the protector of all, but you are not worthy of being protected by anyone. You are the doer of all, but you are not the work of anyone. You are the knower of all, but you are not worthy of being known by anyone. You are the nourisher of all, but you are not worthy of being nourished by anyone. ||260||

The one who bows to you becomes excellent, and the one who praises you becomes a guru or superior due to the greatness of your qualities. On the contrary, the one who does not bow to you is tormented by sins, and the one who does not praise you is always subject to condemnation. ||261||

O Bhagavan! In this world, there are many who are atheists - they do not accept the existence of the afterlife, and therefore indulge in all kinds of sins with abandon. And there are many who are only fatalists, and therefore remain inactive and without effort. But your devotees are theists - they accept the existence of the afterlife, and therefore always perform righteous actions out of fear of "ruining the afterlife," and always strive for the betterment of the afterlife. ||262||

You, the benefactor of all and the knower of all, are present everywhere, at all times, in all things, and with all beings. The moon cannot illuminate everything, and the sun cannot illuminate everything, so what to speak of others? ||263||

May I prosper, I offer this praise here. ||253||

Page #92:
---------------------------
"In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is stated that nothing is permanent, nothing is momentary, nothing is merely knowledge, and nothing is void due to being unseen. However, through your vision, every object is seen as both real and unreal, existing and non-existing. || 264 || The soul exists because it possesses the quality of knowledge. The soul takes rebirth because it retains memory. The soul is omniscient because it exhibits growth in knowledge. These three principles, O Lord, are all your pronouncements. || 265 || Just as one substance is distinct from another, so too is a substance distinct from its qualities, say many ignorant people. But you have declared that the transformation of a substance is due to its qualities, meaning that a substance is not entirely separate from its qualities. Therefore, you are a true seer, you perceive the essence of things accurately. || 266 || O Lord, the moon's light is obscured by Rahu, but the light of your body shines day and night without any obstruction. Therefore, Indra, without proper examination, has given you the name 'Chandra Prabha' (one whose radiance is like the moon). || 267 || Thus, Indra, with a joyful mind, greatly honored himself with this praise, which is profound in both words and meaning, for a long time, accumulating great merit. || 268 || Then, Lord Chandra Prabha, engaging in the propagation of Dharma-Tirtha, traveled throughout all the Aryan lands and reached the Sammed Shikhar. || 269 || There, he ceased his travels and, along with a thousand monks, remained on the Siddha Shila, adorned with the image of a Tirthankara, for a month. || 270 || On the seventh day of the bright fortnight of the month of Phalguna, under the constellation Jyestha, in the afternoon, he attained the fourteenth Ganasthana, having achieved Yoga Nirodha. Then, through the fourth Sukla Dhyana, he shed his body and became the supreme Siddha. || 271-272 || At that time, the gods, who were the creators of the rituals for the Nirvana Kalyanak, arrived and, taking with them the merit-filled offerings, departed to their respective abodes. || 273 ||

Is this the full moon of the autumn season, or a mirror kept for knowing all things, or a radiant, vast mass of nectar, or a collection of atoms of merit? Thus, those whose lotus-like faces cause people to doubt, they are the Chandra Prabha Jinas, who dispel the darkness of ignorance. || 274 ||

What then to speak of other things? || 263 ||"

Page #93:
---------------------------
## The Forty-Fifth Chapter

Whose **leshyas** of both substance and emotion are white like the stalk of a lotus and beautiful, whose face, like the moon, constantly gladdens the earth, adorned with blue lotuses, whose pure mirror of knowledge reflects all beings and their attributes across the three times, and who has destroyed the eight karmas, may that glorious **Chandraprabha**, the Lord of the Jinas, bestow prosperity upon us. || 275 ||

May **Srivarma**, **Sri Dhar Dev**, **Ajit Sena**, **Achyuta**, the king of heaven, **Padmanabha**, **Ahamindra**, and **Chandraprabha**, the eighth **Tirthankara**, protect us. || 276 ||

Thus ends the forty-fifth chapter, describing the **Chandraprabha Purana**, in the **Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha**, composed by the venerable **Bhavadgunabhadracharya**, known as the **Aarsha**. || 54 ||

Page #94:
---------------------------
The one who has established many disciples in the vast and pure path of liberation and is himself engaged in it, and who is the form of *suvidhi* (the best path of liberation) or is endowed with great merit, may that *Suvidhinatha* Bhagavan grant us all the *suvidhi* (the best path of liberation) or great merit. ||1||

In the eastern part of the *Pushkarardhadvipa* (half of the Pushkara continent), in the Videha region east of Mount Meru, on the northern bank of the Sita river, there is a country called Pushkalavati. In its city of *Pundarikini*, King Mahapadma ruled. That king had shattered the groups of enemies with his arms, he was very powerful. He would make any old path new by his conduct, and then for the people who came after, that new path would become old again. ||2-4||

Just as a cowherd takes good care of his cow, protects it, and the cow, being filled with affection, gives him milk with great joy and keeps him satisfied, in the same way, that king took care of his earth, protected it, and the earth, being filled with affection, kept him satisfied with the best things produced in it, such as grain, etc., with great joy. ||5||

That wise man made all the people attached to him by his qualities, and all the people also pleased that wise man in every way. ||6||

The ministers, priests, etc., whom he had appointed and promoted, all of them kept on increasing that king by their respective services. ||7||

Just as many qualities are attained in the growth of sages, in the same way, many qualities were being attained in the growth of that virtuous and learned king, and just as polished gems are beautiful, in the same way, many qualities were being beautified in that king. ||8||

That king, dividing his royal fortune appropriately, enjoyed it with his dependent family for a long time without interruption. It is right, because virtuous people consider fortune to be for the enjoyment of all. ||9||

A king who knows *niti* (ethics) is said to be like Indra and Yama, but that virtuous soul was like Indra only, because all his subjects were virtuous, therefore there was no one in his kingdom who deserved punishment. ||10||

His lineage of happiness continued uninterrupted, and the things worthy of his enjoyment were always present, therefore that king, the possessor of vast merit, never experienced the separation from his happiness. ||11||

Page #95:
---------------------------
The 55th Chapter
This is the festival of the greatness of one's own merit. Once, hearing of the great glory of the Jina, Bhūta-hita, who resided in the beautiful garden called Manohara, [the king] went there with great pomp and, after circumambulating the Lord of beings three times, performed worship. [12-13]
Having bowed down and sat in his proper place with folded hands, he listened to the Dharma and, having gained understanding, thought thus: [14]
"This soul, contaminated by the arising of false belief from time immemorial, creates suffering for itself through itself. Like a madman, like a drunkard, like a blind man, like one possessed, it acts according to whatever is dictated by its delusion, and it has been doing so for a long time. Wandering in the forest of existence, it has fallen from the path of liberation. Therefore, fearing this, and desiring the path of liberation, he gave his wealth to his son, Dhanada, and, along with many other kings who were afraid of existence, he became a mendicant. [15-18]
Gradually, he became a transmigrator of the eleven-fold ocean, he became devoted to the contemplation of the sixteen causes of existence, and he bound the karma of the name of the Tirthankara. Finally, he took the death of meditation. [19]
By the power of the death of meditation, he became the Indra of the Prāṇa heaven. There, his lifespan was twenty oceans, his body was three and a half hands high, he had a white complexion, he breathed every ten months, he took food after twenty thousand years, he had mental contemplation, his knowledge extended to the earth like smoke, his power of action, strength, and brilliance were equal to the extent of his knowledge, and his glory was enhanced by eight excellent qualities. [20-22]
Having enjoyed great happiness there, he was about to come here. At that time, in the country of Bharata, in the island of Jambudvipa, the Kshatriya king, Suग्रीव, of the Ikshvāku lineage and the Kāśyapa gotra, ruled in the city of Kākaṇḍī. His beautiful queen was Jayarāmā. [23-24]
Having received great honor from the gods, such as a shower of precious jewels, she saw sixteen dreams on the ninth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phālguna, in the constellation of Mūla, at dawn, when her eyes were still somewhat clouded by remaining sleep. [25-26]

Page #96:
---------------------------
## Chapter 68: The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

**Verse 27:** On the first day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, in the auspicious Jaitra Yoga, the supreme goddess gave birth to a son. At that very moment, Indra, along with the gods, performed an abhisheka (ceremony of anointing) with the water of the Kshira Sagar (ocean of milk), adorned him with ornaments, and named him Pushpadanta, as he was radiant with the brilliance of his body, which shone like the petals of a white Kund flower.

**Verse 28:** After the passing of ninety crore (ninety billion) Sagaras (oceans), the time of Pushpadanta Bhagwan arrived. His lifespan was included within this period.

**Verse 29:** His lifespan was two lakh (two hundred thousand) years in the past, his body was one hundred dhanush (bows) tall, and he enjoyed the pleasures of his childhood for fifty lakh (five million) years in the past.

**Verse 30:** Subsequently, Pushpadanta Bhagwan experienced the joy of a glorious kingdom, revered by the gods like Achyuta Indra. He was surrounded by the best of people, who showered him with praise.

**Verse 31:** Wise people, tell me, which is greater: the happiness that Bhagwan Suvidhinath received from all the women, senses, and this kingdom, or the happiness that those women received from him?

**Verse 32:** Bhagwan is certainly virtuous, but I consider those women to be even more virtuous, for they delighted and played with Bhagwan, who was close to attaining liberation.

**Verse 33:** Bhagwan, immersed in the ocean of supreme happiness of heaven, came to earth. This means he was not satisfied with the pleasures of heaven, and therefore came to earth. It must be said that the true objects of enjoyment were those that aroused his desire and appealed to him.

**Verse 34:** Bhagwan, who was not satisfied even after attaining Indrahood countless times, if he was satisfied with this happiness of the human realm, then it must be said that this happiness is supreme among all happiness.

**Verse 35:** While ruling with love, when fifty thousand years and twenty-eight purvagas (a unit of time) of his reign had passed, he was looking at the directions one day.

**Verse 36-37:** At that time, seeing a meteor falling, his mind was struck with this thought: "This is not a meteor, but a light that destroys the darkness of my eternal, great delusion."

**Verse 38:** Thus, prompted by that meteor, he attained pure self-knowledge. He, the self-enlightened Bhagwan, became aware of the truth and contemplated it in this way:

**Verse 39:** "Today, I have clearly seen that this world is a deception, presented in a distorted way by the web of karma and its lords."

Page #97:
---------------------------
The 45th chapter of the book describes the story of a king who renounced his worldly possessions and became a Jain monk. 

The king was troubled by the six enemies of the soul: lust, anger, greed, attachment, pride, and jealousy. He realized that the world is impermanent and that there is no true happiness to be found in it. He also understood that the self is distinct from the body and that the body is merely a temporary vessel for the soul.

The king was inspired by the teachings of the Jain Tirthankaras and decided to dedicate his life to spiritual liberation. He renounced his kingdom and all of his worldly possessions and took the vows of a Jain monk.

The king's journey to liberation was not easy. He faced many challenges and temptations, but he remained steadfast in his commitment to the path. He practiced the Jain principles of non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, celibacy, and non-attachment.

After many years of rigorous spiritual practice, the king attained liberation. He became a Jina, a conqueror of the cycle of birth and death.

The chapter concludes with a description of the Jina's qualities and the benefits of following the Jain path.

Page #98:
---------------------------
The Uttarapurana of the Mahapuraana states that Pushpadanta was accompanied by eighty thousand Aryikas, two hundred thousand Shravakas, and five hundred thousand Shravikas. He was also attended by countless gods and a countable number of Tiryanchas. Thus, he was revered by twelve assemblies. After traveling through the Aryadeshas, Pushpadanta reached Sammed Shikhar and attained liberation on the eighth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada, in the Mula Nakshatra, at dusk, along with a thousand monks. The gods arrived and performed his Nirvana-Kalyanak, then ascended to heaven. 

We bow to Pushpadanta, who has made the difficult path of liberation easy and pure for others, who has shown the best way to attain heaven and liberation for devotees who have cultivated calmness in their minds, who is the lord of liberation-wealth, whose teeth are like blooming flowers, who is self-luminous, and whose face is adorned by the brilliance of his teeth.

O God! Your body is peaceful, your words are captivating, your character is beneficial to all, and you are like a dense, shady tree in the midst of the vast desert of the world. Therefore, we all take refuge in you.

May Suvidhinatha, or Pushpadanta, who was first a king named Mahapadma, then the Indra of the fourteenth Kalpa in heaven, and later the ninth Tirthankara, King Suvidhi in the Bharat Kshetra, bestow prosperity upon us all.

Thus ends the fifty-fifth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana, compiled by Bhagavad Gunabhadracharya, known as the Pushpadanta Purana.

Page #99:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Fifth Chapter

Whose righteous Dharma is cool like the moon to those scorched by the rays of the sun of Karma, may that cool, peace-giving Lord be cool to us. || 7 ||

In the eastern half of Pushkaradvipa, in the Videha region east of Mount Meru, on the southern bank of the Sita River, lies the country of Vatsa. In its well-protected city, King Padma Gulma ruled. || 2 ||

King Padma Gulma was a master of the four expedients: Sama, Dana, Danda, and Bheda. He was also knowledgeable in the five elements of treaty and war: Sahaya, Sadhanopāya, Desha Vibhaga, Kala Vibhaga, and Vinipata Pratikara. || 3 ||

His kingdom, a tree nourished by the waters of wisdom, bore fruit in the form of Dharma, Artha, and Kama, through its seven branches: Swami, Mantri, Kila, Khajana, Mitra, Desha, and Sena. || 4 ||

He was ablaze with the flames of his prowess, and his Chandrahasa sword, a river of water, submerged all the enemy kings, mountains of pride. || 5 ||

Through divine grace, intelligence, and effort, he acquired Lakshmi and made it available for all to enjoy, while also enjoying it himself. || 6 ||

He protected the earth, a wheel of fortune, with his wealth earned through righteous means, satisfying the multitude of supplicants, and enjoying the pleasures of all seasons. || 7 ||

The sweet songs of cuckoos and bees were his melodious words, the swaying leaves of trees were his lips, the fragrant, intoxicated bees clustered around flowers were his eyes, the clear moonlight free from mist was his laughter, the pure sky was his garment, the full moon was his face, the fragrant, cool breeze from the Malaya mountains was his breath, and the yellow hue of the Kaner flowers was the color of his body. || 8-10 ||

Though Kamadeva was bodiless and had only five arrows, he inflicted pain on King Padma Gulma with such cruelty as if he had many arrows. For who is not powerful when armed with the force of time? || 11 ||

Page #100:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the king, whose mind was captivated by the spring goddess Lakshmi, and who desired many pleasures, continued to play with her, increasing his joy.  || 12 || But just as a cloud driven by the wind disappears, so too did the spring season, driven away by the wind of time.  His heart was filled with sorrow at its disappearance. || 13 || He thought, "This desire is a wicked thing, a sinner who afflicts the whole world, dwelling in everyone's mind, and even without a physical form, it is still a source of conflict." || 14 || "I will burn this desire today with the fire of meditation."  Thus, he developed detachment.  He entrusted the burden of the kingdom to his son, Chandana, and went to the sage Anand, becoming detached from all possessions and his body. || 15-16 || He studied all the scriptures, including the Vipaka Sutra, and performed austerities for a long time.  He took the Tirthankara vows, practiced the three jewels (right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct), and at the end of his life, he died in meditation and became Indra in the fifteenth heaven, Aran, possessing great splendor. || 17-18 || There, his lifespan was twenty-two sagaras, his body was three hands tall, his substance and essence were both white, he breathed once every eleven months, he was content with mental nourishment for twenty-two thousand years, he was prosperous, possessed mental clarity, and had the eight qualities of Prakama, etc.  He was illuminated by the knowledge of the sixth hell, his strength and power extended that far, and he was a transmigrant of the vast ocean of happiness, free from external afflictions.  Thus, he spent his countless years like a moment, like a single instant of time. || 16-22 || When six months remained of his lifespan as Indra, and he was about to descend to earth, in the Malaya country of the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa, the king of the Ikshvaku dynasty, Dridharatha, ruled the city of Bhadrapur.  His queen was named Sunanda.  By the command of Kubera, the Yaksha gods, through their messengers, filled Sunanda's womb with jewels six months beforehand.  She, too, was a queen of sixteen lokas, at the end of her lifespan. || 24-25 ||

Page #101:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Fifth Chapter

73

**26.**  The elephant entered the queen's womb, and the king was overjoyed. This happened on the eighth day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra, in the Purvaashada Nakshatra.

**27.**  The deity descended from heaven in Chaitra, on the eighth day of the dark fortnight, in the Purvaashada Nakshatra, due to his virtuous qualities like good conduct. He entered the queen's womb like a drop of water enters a pearl shell, due to his virtuous qualities like roundness.

**28.**  The gods performed the first auspicious worship for his pleasure. After twelve months, on the twelfth day of the dark fortnight of Magha, in the Vishvayoga, he was born.

**29.**  The gods, filled with great joy, immediately took him to Mount Meru and performed his great coronation. They named him Shitalnath.

**30.**  After the passing of Pushpadanta, nine crore oceans of time passed, and then Shitalnath was born. His lifespan was included in this time. Before his birth, for one-fourth of a Palyopama, there was a break in Dharma-Karma.

**31.**  His body was golden in color, his lifespan was one lakh Palyopamas, and his height was ninety Dhanus.

**32.**  When one-fourth of his lifespan passed, he reached the age of a young man and attained the position of his father. He achieved the supreme Siddhi and ruled his people.

**33.**  His Karma, like good conduct, good name, good deeds, and good lineage, were all free from the Karma of death and were accompanied by the Karma of Tirthankara.

**34.**  All these Karmas combined together, due to the rise of his excellent Anubhaga-Bandha, provided him with all kinds of happiness. How can his happiness be compared to anything else?

**35.**  When one-fourth of his lifespan remained, and his worldly wanderings were very few, his Pratikyana-Avarana Kshaya ended.

**36.**  The great and powerful Shitalnath once went to the forest for a stroll. He saw that the layer of frost, which had covered everything just a moment ago, had quickly disappeared.

**37.**  This incident gave him self-knowledge, and he began to think that everything in the world is constantly changing, and therefore, the whole world is perishable.

**38.**  Today, I have realized the truth of suffering, the sufferer, and the cause of suffering. Due to the influence of delusion, I used to consider these three as happiness, the happy, and the cause of happiness.

**39.**  "I am happy, this is happiness, and I will get this happiness again due to the merit I have earned." This is a great delusion that arises without the knowledge of time.

Page #102:
---------------------------
Whether there is karma or punya, if there is karma, how can this being get happiness from it? Because this being is full of many defects like attachment, aversion, and desire. ||40|| If happiness is obtained only from objects, then I have attained the end of objects, that is, I have obtained the greatest happiness. Then why am I not satisfied? This shows that happiness related to objects is false happiness. ||41|| Indifference is true happiness, and how can that indifference be possible while being in delusion? Therefore, I first destroy this enemy of delusion quickly from the root. ||42|| Thus, considering the true nature of things, he gave his entire kingdom to his son, who is worthy of being abandoned by the wise and worthy of being honored by the deluded beings. ||43|| At that time, the Laukantika Devas who praised him and who received the initiation-auspiciousness puja, arrived. The Lord Shitalnath, riding on a palanquin named Shukraprabha, reached the Sahetuka forest. ||44|| There, on the day of Magha Krishna Dwadashi, in the evening, in the Purvashadha Nakshatra, he observed the rule of two fasts and took samayam with a thousand kings. ||45|| The Lord, the holder of four knowledges, entered the city of Arishtanagara on the tenth day for charaya. There, the king Punarvasu, who performed nine kinds of devotion, gave him kheer as food and, being pleased, received the Pancha-acharya given by the gods. ||46-47|| After that, spending three years in the Chanasthya state, one day he sat under a bel tree, observing the rule of two days of fasting. As a result, on the day of Pausha Krishna Chaturdashi, in the evening, in the Purvashadha Nakshatra, the Lord, who was radiant like gold, attained Kevalgyan. At that time, the gods came and worshipped his knowledge-auspiciousness. ||45-46|| In his assembly, there were eighty-one Ganadharas, who possessed seven riches, including Anagara. There were fourteen hundred Purvadharis, sixty-nine thousand two hundred teachers, seven thousand two hundred Avadhignyanis, seven thousand Kevalgyanis, twelve thousand monks who possessed the Vikriya Riddhi, seven thousand five hundred Manahparyaygyanis who worshipped their feet. In this way, the total number of monks was one lakh, and there were three lakh eighty thousand Aryikas, including Dharana, etc., with them. ||55||

Page #103:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Sixth Chapter

Having traversed many lands and guided countless beings with false views towards the right path, [the Tirthankara] preached the Dharma. ||56||

Reaching Mount Sammed Shikhar, he remained in a state of Yoga- Nirodha for a month. He then adopted the Pratimā Yoga and, surrounded by a thousand monks, attained liberation on the eighth day of the bright fortnight of Ashvin, in the afternoon, under the constellation Purva Ashadha. ||57-58||

The Devas, illuminating the entire universe with the radiance of their bodies, performed the Pancham Kalyanak and praised the cool [Tirthankara] before ascending to heaven. ||59||

**Shārdūlavikridita Vṛtta**

I bow to the cool [Tirthankara], worshipped by the Devas, who destroys all desires and lust. His birth brought joy to the world, like the rising moon. The faces of all his relatives bloomed like lotuses in the heat of the sun. Those seeking wealth obtained their desires and rejoiced. ||60||

The celestial maidens, with their sweet voices, sing praises of the victorious hero who conquered the fierce demon of delusion. Their necklaces are adorned with fragrant flowers, their foreheads bear the crescent moon, and their bodies are perfumed with the fragrant nectar that flows from the cheeks of the elephants of the directions. ||61||

**Rathoddhata Vṛtta**

O noble beings, bow down to the compassionate and peaceful Shitalnath, the tenth Tirthankara. He was praised by all for his virtues, he was the king of the Padma Gulma, and then he became the Indra of the Aran heaven, worshipped by the Devas. ||62||

**Anuṣṭup**

At the end of the pilgrimage of Shitalesh, the true Dharma perished due to the lack of speakers, listeners, and practitioners, caused by the fault of time. ||63||

**Notes:**

* **Sammed Shikhar:** The sacred mountain where Mahavira attained liberation.
* **Yoga-Nirodha:** A state of deep meditation and detachment.
* **Pratimā Yoga:** A state of complete absorption in the divine.
* **Pancham Kalyanak:** The five auspicious events in the life of a Tirthankara.
* **Shitalnath:** Another name for the Tirthankara Shitalnath.
* **Aran:** A celestial realm.
* **Padma Gulma:** A king who was later reborn as a Tirthankara.

Page #104:
---------------------------
76
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapuraana, it is said that in the Malaya country, the king Megha-ratha resided in the city of Bhadraila. His minister was Satyakiriti. || 64 || One day, while seated on his throne in the assembly hall, the king Megha-ratha, desiring to give charity for the sake of Dharma, asked the assembled people || 65 || "Which of all the charities, when given, yields the greatest fruit?" In response, the minister, who knew the essence of charity, said || 66 || "The best of the Munis have declared that there are three kinds of charity: Shastra-dana (gift of scripture), Abhaya-dana (gift of fearlessness), and Anna-dana (gift of food). These charities yield the greatest fruit for the wise, i.e., Abhaya-dana yields more fruit than Anna-dana, and Shastra-dana yields more fruit than Abhaya-dana. || 67 || That which is spoken by the omniscient, free from contradictions, etc., and which removes the sins of violence, etc., and is supported by both direct and indirect evidence, is called Shastra. || 68 || To explain the aforementioned Shastra for the benefit of virtuous people who are afraid of the cycle of birth and death is called Shastra-dana. || 69 || The Muni who desires liberation and knows the nature of the principles, renounces the harming of living beings, out of a desire to abandon the causes of bondage. This is called Abhaya-dana. || 70 || For the wise, who are free from the faults of violence, etc., the giving of pure food, for the protection of the body and other external means, is called Anna-dana. || 71 || By giving and receiving these initial and final charities, both the giver and the receiver experience the destruction of karma and the accumulation of auspicious karma. By giving Abhaya-dana, only the giver experiences these two fruits. || 72 || There is no charity greater than knowledge, and knowledge cannot exist without Shastra. Indeed, Shastra is the supreme means of illuminating the principles of what is to be abandoned and what is to be adopted. || 73 || To explain Shastra properly, to listen to it, and to contemplate it is the cause of pure intellect. When one has pure intellect, the liberated soul abandons what is harmful and adopts what is beneficial, becomes a devotee, takes refuge in the path of liberation, gradually pacifies the senses and mind, and finally, taking refuge in pure meditation, attains the imperishable state of liberation. || 74-75 || Therefore, of all charities, Shastra-dana is the best. It is free from sinful actions and is the cause of attaining liberation, which is the state of one's own bliss, for both the giver and the receiver. || 76 || Abhaya-dana is superior to Anna-dana, because the latter involves a little initial sin. By these three great charities, one attains the supreme state. || 77 ||

Page #105:
---------------------------
## The 56th Chapter

Even though the king had been told this, he did not accept it. He wanted to give a different kind of donation, due to the greatness of the Kapotaleshya. || 78 ||

In that same city, there lived a Brahmin named Bhuti Sharma. He used his intelligence to please the king with false flattery. || 79 ||

When he passed away, his son, Mundshalayan, who was knowledgeable in all scriptures, was present in the assembly. He spoke up, saying: || 80 ||

"These three donations are meant for the ascetics or the poor. For great kings with grand desires, there is another, superior donation." || 81 ||

"Give a vast donation of land, gold, and other riches to Brahmins who are blessed with the power to curse and grant boons. This donation will bring you glory that will last as long as the moon and the sun." || 82 ||

"There is a scriptural text written by the sages that supports this donation." Saying this, he brought a book from his home and had it read aloud in the assembly. || 83 ||

Thus, Mundshalayan, knowing the king's intentions, seized the opportunity to give this misguided advice. The king, pleased with him, accepted it. || 84 ||

Mundshalayan was not afraid of sin, he was wicked, blind to the world, and foolish. Yet, the king, driven by a great desire for the afterlife, was attached to him and pleased with him. || 85 ||

One day, during the full moon of the Kartik month, the foolish king, after purifying himself, worshipped Mundshalayan with offerings of rice and other things. He then gave him the donation of land, gold, and other things as Mundshalayan had suggested. Seeing this, the devoted minister spoke to the king: || 86-87 ||

"The Jinas have said that giving away one's wealth or possessions for the sake of granting boons is a donation. Those who understand this call it a boon for oneself and others." || 88 ||

"The increase of virtuous deeds is a boon for oneself, and the increase of another's virtues is a boon for others. The word 'Swa' (self) is synonymous with wealth. Giving wealth to a deserving recipient is called 'Swa Dana' (self-donation). This is the praiseworthy donation. Why are you, knowing this, destroying the giver, the donation, and the recipient by giving wealth to an undeserving person?" || 89-90 ||

"What good is a good seed, even if it is abundant, if it is sown in barren land? It will only bear the fruit of decay and destruction of the seed." || 91 ||

Page #106:
---------------------------
Even a small, good seed, if sown in a good field by a person who knows the time, will yield a thousandfold fruit for the sower. || 92 || Thus, though that wise and devoted minister explained to the king with millions of examples, the king did not benefit from it at all. || 93 || For a person of opposite intellect, the words of good men are like a mantra for a bitten by time, medicine for one whose life is complete, and a mirror for a blind from birth. || 94 || Abandoning the path of giving that had been followed from the beginning, that king, who had gone astray, made the path of modern giving, as spoken by the foolish Mundashalayan, prevalent. || 95 || Thus, Mundashalayan, the son of Bhootisharma, who was greedy for worldly things, himself manifested and propagated ten kinds of giving - giving of daughters, elephants, gold, horses, cows, maidservants, sesame seeds, chariots, land, and houses - that were pleasing to the poor, at the end of the pilgrimage of the Jina, the cool one, Shitalnath. || 96 || Thus, the fifty-sixth chapter, describing the Shitalapurana, is complete in the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Bhagavadgunabhadracharya, known as the Arsha. || 56 ||

Page #107:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

"Among those worthy of refuge, there is no other worthy of refuge than Shreyansanath for the sake of welfare. Thus, by the wise, for the sake of welfare, Shreyansanath is the most worthy of refuge for the welfare of those seeking welfare." || 1 ||

In the Sukkachha region of the Videha country, in the north of the Sita river, in the Pushkarardha-dvipa, there was a city called Kshemapura. In it ruled a king named Nalina Prabha, who humbled all his enemies and was the refuge of immeasurable glory obtained through the love of his subjects. || 2-3 ||

This king, who was distinguished by three distinct categories, was always growing, possessing powers, siddhis, and upadhis that led to liberation, and having attained peace, effort, welfare, and yoga. || 4 ||

He ruled his subjects justly, and his position as the protector of the earth was meaningful because he kept the earth well-maintained and affectionate. || 5 ||

In this excellent king, who walked the right path, dharma was dharma itself, but artha and kama were also combined with dharma. Therefore, he was truly dharmic. || 6 ||

Thus, this king, who was a mine of happiness arising from the influence of his own virtuous deeds, ruled this entire earth for a long time, like a Lokapala. || 7 ||

One day, he learned from the forest warden that the Ananta Jinendra had descended in the Sahasramravan. So, he went to the Sahasramravan with his entire family. There, he worshipped the Jinendradeva, praised him for a long time, bowed down, and then sat in his proper place. After listening to the Dharma discourse, he attained true knowledge, and he began to think: "Not knowing who, where, by whom, how, from whom, and how much welfare can be obtained, I have wandered in countless births, filled with sorrow and grief. The many possessions I have accumulated are due to delusion. If liberation can be attained by renouncing them, then what is the use of wasting time?" || 8-11 ||

Thinking thus, he gave his kingdom to his virtuous son, Suputra, and took the vow of non-attachment along with many kings. || 12 ||

He studied the eleven angas, was a Tirthankara, and at the end of the kalpa, he became the celestial king, Achyutaiya. || 13 ||

Page #108:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, this Achuta, who lived for twenty-two oceans (a measure of time), was the Indra of the Pushpottara Vimana. He was three handspans tall and possessed the Leshya, etc., as described before. ||14|| He enjoyed the best of pleasures with beautiful celestial beings, who possessed divine qualities, day after day. ||15|| The Indras of the heavens beyond the sixteenth heaven are devoid of attachment, while the other gods experience only a little pleasure. Therefore, he spent his lifespan content with the greatest pleasures of the world. ||16|| After experiencing the pleasures there, he was ready to come here. At that time, in this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, the king of Singhapura, Vishnu by name, a renowned member of the Ikshvaku dynasty, was ruling. ||17|| His beloved was named Nandā. Nandā had received various forms of worship, including rain-making, for six months before the conception. ||18|| On the sixth day of the dark fortnight of Jyeshtha, during the Shravana constellation, at dawn, she saw sixteen dreams and an elephant entering her mouth. ||19|| Understanding the meaning of these dreams from her husband, she was overjoyed. At that very moment, Indra arrived and performed the ceremony of Garbha-Kalyanak (ceremony for a pregnant woman). ||20|| Nandā, who was destined to bear a noble child, spent nine months as described before and, on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of Phalguna, during the Vishnu Yoga, gave birth to Achuta, the holder of three knowledges, the great fortunate one, for the happiness of the world, just as a cloud brings forth a great rain. ||21-22|| Just as all the water bodies become clear and joyful with the arrival of the autumn season, so too, with his birth, the minds of all beings became joyful and filled with happiness. ||23|| With the birth of the Lord, the beggars were happy to receive wealth, the wealthy were happy to satisfy the poor, and both were happy to enjoy their desired pleasures. ||24|| At that time, all the seasons, together, manifested with their own beautiful qualities, bringing happiness to all beings. ||25|| It was a wonder that at the time of the Lord's birth, the sick became healthy, the sorrowful became free from sorrow, and the sinful became righteous. ||26|| If ordinary people were experiencing such great joy at that time, then how can one measure the joy of his parents? ||27||

Page #109:
---------------------------
The 57th Chapter

The four types of gods, having made the world radiant with their brilliance and the weight of their ornaments, descended from all sides. [28] Delightful drums sounded, showers of flowers fell, divine dancers danced, and the celestial singers sang sweetly. [29] "Is this the world of the gods, or is it some other realm even more magnificent?" Such were the words of the gods. [30]  Soudharma Indra, adorned with the finest ornaments, pleased the parents of the Jina. Sachi, the queen of the gods, using her magic, pleased the mother and took the Jina child. [31] Placing the Jina child on the back of the elephant Airavata, Soudharma Indra, with his retinue of gods, playfully reached the great, powerful Mount Meru. [32] There, he anointed the Jina with a multitude of pots of milk-like water brought from the fifth ocean of milk, adorned him with ornaments, and joyfully proclaimed him as "Shreyans." [33] Returning from Mount Meru, Indra placed the Jina child in his mother's lap and, filled with joy, went to heaven with the gods. [34] Just as the limbs of the young moon grow, nourished by rays of light, so too did the limbs of the Jina grow, nourished by virtues. [35] After the liberation of Shitalnath, when an interval of one ocean less eighty-four lakh twenty-six thousand years had passed, and the tradition of Dharma had been broken for half a palya, the Jina Shreyans was born. His lifespan was included in this interval. His total lifespan was eighty-four lakh years. His body was radiant like gold, his height was eighty bows, and he was a repository of strength, vigor, and brilliance. When twenty-one lakh years of his youth had passed, he attained a kingdom worthy of worship by the gods, and all beings bowed to him. He satisfied all beings like the moon, and he scorched the arrogant like the sun. [36-39] He made himself brilliant like a great jewel, deep like the ocean, cool like the moon, and eternally beneficial like Dharma. [40] Due to the good deeds performed in his previous births, he had attained all kinds of wealth. Therefore, his intellect and prowess were fully devoted to Dharma and desire. [41]

Page #110:
---------------------------
## Chapter 82

In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, and Shubha Vinod, the days of the gods, who were engaged in auspicious activities, were spent in play with women. || 42 ||

Thus, for forty-two years, he ruled. After that, one day, seeing the change of the spring season, he began to think: "The time that has created this entire world is itself being destroyed by the change of moments, hours, and days. Then, how can there be stability in any other thing? In reality, this entire world is perishable. Until the eternal state, the imperishable state of liberation, is attained, how can one stay happily in one place?" || 43-45 ||

While he was thinking this, the Saraswat and other worldly gods came and praised him. He gave the kingdom to his auspicious son, received the great coronation ceremony that takes place during the initiation-auspicious ceremony by the Indras, and, mounted on a palanquin named Vimala Prabha, fit to be carried by gods, he departed for the great garden called Manohar. Arriving there, he renounced food for two days and, on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phalguna, in the morning, in the Shravana constellation, he took the vow of restraint along with a thousand kings. At that time, the fourth stage of knowledge of the mind arose in him. On the second day, he entered Siddharth Nagar for food. || 46-49 ||

There, the king named Nanda, whose radiance was like gold, offered him food with devotion. By this, that king, who was endowed with excellent intellect, obtained great merit and wonder. || 50 ||

Thus, after two years of the state of concealment, one day, the great sage Shreyansnath, sitting under the Tambura tree in the garden called Manohar, observed a two-day fast. There, on the new moon day of the dark fortnight of the month of Magha, in the Shravana constellation, in the evening, the knowledge of liberation arose in him. || 51-52 ||

At that time, the gods of the four categories, endowed with various powers, performed the ceremony of his fourth auspicious event. || 53 ||

The Lord Kunthunath, surrounded by a group of seventy-seven Ganadharas, accompanied by thirteen hundred former holders of the office, worshipped by forty-eight thousand two hundred excellent teacher monks, honored by six thousand Avadhi Nayas, accompanied by six thousand five hundred suns of knowledge of liberation, adorned by eleven thousand holders of the power of transformation, endowed with six thousand knowledge of the mind, and served by five thousand chief debaters, was thus accompanied by eighty-four thousand monks. Besides these...

Page #111:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

83

**57.** The one who is known as the "Six Thousand Prama" and who has attained the knowledge of the "Mind-Perception" (Manahparyaya), and who is the chief of the "Five-Vow" (Pancha-Vrata) followers.

**58.** The one who is known as the "Three-Zero-Yuga-Eight" (Shunya-Tray-Yuga-Ashta) and who has attained the knowledge of the "All-Marked" (Akhila-Lakshita), and who is the chief of the "Four-Sky-Wing" (Kha-Chatushtaya-Paksha) followers.

**59.** The one who is worshipped by two hundred thousand (Dvilaksha) followers, and who has two times the number of "Shravaka" (Shravaka) followers, and who is the chief of the "Two-Fold" (Dviguna) followers. The one who, as mentioned before, is accompanied by countless gods and goddesses and beings of the lower realms, and who is constantly preaching the Dharma.

**60.** The one who, after reaching the Sammed Shikhar, remained in a state of "Nir-Kriya" (Nir-Kriya) for a month, and who, along with a thousand monks, held the "Pratimā-Yoga" (Pratimā-Yoga).

**61.** The one who, on the full moon day of the month of Shravan, in the evening, under the constellation of Dhanishtha, with countless "Gunashreni" (Gunashreni) followers, repeatedly uttered the five short vowels "A, I, U, R, Lu" (A, I, U, R, Lu).

**62.** The one who, by the power of meditation, destroyed all his karmas in the five stages of "Sthāna" (Sthāna), and who, after attaining the fifth stage of "Gati" (Gati), became a "Siddh" (Siddh) and attained liberation.

**63.** The gods thought, "Without him, our state of "Nir-Mimisha-Tva" (Nir-Mimisha-Tva) would be meaningless." They celebrated his "Nirvana-Kalyanak" (Nirvana-Kalyanak) and ascended to heaven.

**64.** The "Vasant-Tilaka" (Vasant-Tilaka) verse:

> The one who, at the time of his birth, destroyed all darkness and saw the entire universe, both animate and inanimate, and who, without any opposition, remained in his own form, that great "Jina" (Jina) - may he guide you all away from misfortune.

**65.** The "Shārdūla-Vikrīḍita" (Shārdūla-Vikrīḍita) verse:

> Your words, O Lord, are full of compassion and are beneficial to all. Your entire "Charitra" (Charitra) is beneficial to your friends. These two qualities of yours reveal your supreme purity. Therefore, Indra and other gods take refuge in you with devotion. Thus, the wise praise you. May the great "Shreyansanatha" (Shreyansanatha) be for your welfare.

**Note:** The text mentions that one lakh twenty thousand "Aryika" (Aryika) followers worshipped him, two lakh "Shravaka" (Shravaka) followers and four lakh "Shravaka" (Shravaka) followers were with him, and countless gods and goddesses and beings of the lower realms were always with him.

Page #112:
---------------------------
84
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
May the glorious Shreyanasana, the lord of the Tirthankaras, who is great in the three worlds, be your fortune, who, by expounding the Syadvada, attained Siddhi. || 66 ||
Salutations to the poet of this Puraana, who is a follower of Jinasena, and to the venerable Gunabhadra, whose feet are worshipped by the Lokasena. || 67 ||
In this Tirtha, the glorious Keshava was the first to arise, the energetic one. And in the lineage of the Chakravartis, Bharata was the first, the protector of the three continents. || 68 ||
His story is narrated from his third birth. This is a good example of the rise and fall of kings. || 69 ||
In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there is a country called Magadha. In it is the city of Rajagriha, which is superior even to Indrapuri. || 70 ||
This is the home of the kings who were born from heaven. Therefore, its name Rajagriha is meaningful, in terms of the wealth of enjoyment and enjoyment. || 71 ||
Once, Vishvabhuuti was the lord of that city of Rajagriha. His queen's name was Jaini. They had a son who was known as Vishvanandi, because he was of a nature that brought joy to all. || 72 ||
Vishvabhuuti had a younger brother named Visakhabuuti. His wife's name was Lakshmana, and they had a son named Visakha-nandi. || 73 ||
Vishvabhuuti left his kingdom to his younger brother and went for tapasya. Visakhabuuti, who had made all the kings bow down, ruled and protected the people. || 74 ||
In that city of Rajagriha, there was a beautiful garden called Nandan, adorned with various creepers, vines, and trees. This garden was dearer to Vishvanandi than his own life. || 75 ||
The son of Visakhabuuti, by scolding the forest guards, forcibly took possession of that forest. This led to a battle between the two - Vishvanandi and Visakha-nandi. || 76 ||
Visakha-nandi could not bear the battle, so he fled. Seeing this, Vishvanandi became detached and thought, "Damn this delusion!" || 77 ||
He left everything and went to the presence of the Sambhuta Guru. He made his uncle Visakhabuuti his predecessor and took diksha. || 78 ||
He was endowed with good conduct and virtues, and he performed tapasya by fasting. Once, he went to Mathurapuri to eat. || 79 ||
[This verse seems to be inserted.]

Page #113:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

A cow with a calf pushed him, causing him to fall. The wicked Visakha-nandi, banished from his kingdom due to his foolishness, wandered through many lands and came to reside in Mathura. He was sitting on the roof of a prostitute's house when he saw Vishva-nandi fall. He laughed scornfully, saying, "Where is your prowess now?"

Vishva-nandi, who was suffering from a wound, heard Visakha-nandi's laughter and was diagnosed. When his life force was exhausted, he became a deva in Maha-Shukra heaven, where his father's younger brother was born.

He lived there for sixteen oceans of years, enjoying divine pleasures with groups of goddesses and apsaras. Then he was cast down to earth. In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, in a beautiful country, in the city of Podanapura, there was a king named Prajapati. His beloved queen, Mrigavati, had a son named Tripṛṣṭha, born after a auspicious dream.

His paternal uncle, who had also been cast down from Maha-Shukra heaven, was born to the king's other wife, Jayavati, and was named Vijaya.

Visakha-nandi wandered through the cycle of existence for a long time. In the city of Alaka, on the northern slopes of the Vijaya mountain, the king Mayuragriva, through the ripening of his good karma, had a son named Ashvagriva, a conqueror of enemies.

These two, Vijaya and Tripṛṣṭha, were the first Balabhadra and Narayana. Their bodies were eighty bows tall, and their lifespan was eighty-four lakh years. Vijaya's body was white like a conch shell, and Tripṛṣṭha's body was blue like an Indra-nila gem. They both killed the arrogant Ashvagriva and became lords of the earth, adorned with three continents.

They both ruled over sixteen thousand crowned kings, Vidyadharas, and Vyantara devas.

Tripṛṣṭha had seven treasures protected by the devas: a bow, a conch shell, a discus, a club, a sword, a spear, and a mace.

Balabhadra also had four treasures: a mace, a garland of gems, a club, and a plow. These were like right faith, right knowledge, right conduct, and austerity, which increase prosperity.

Tripṛṣṭha had sixteen thousand wives, headed by Swayamprabha. Balabhadra's wives were similar, and his beloved was Manahpriya.

Page #114:
---------------------------
## 86
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, states that Triprishtha Narayana, who enjoyed many beginnings and many possessions, spent a long time with those women and then reached the seventh earth, the seventh hell. Similarly, Ashvagriva Pratinarayana also went to the seventh hell. || 95 ||
Balabhadra, grieved by his brother's suffering, took samayam (vow of non-attachment) at that time from the yogi-indra named Suvarna Kumbha and gradually became an anegarakevali (a liberated soul). || 96 ||
Look, Triprishtha and Vijay ruled together and enjoyed unparalleled happiness for a long time, but Triprishtha, the abode of all suffering, reached the seventh hell, and Balabhadra, the abode of happiness, went to the top of the three worlds and resided there. Therefore, this evil karma, which is unfavorable, is to be condemned. Who can be a partaker of happiness in this world until this karma is destroyed? || 97 ||
Triprishtha, first became a king named Vishvanandi, then a deva in the Maha Shukra heaven, then an Ardhacharki-Narayana named Triprishtha, and then, accumulating sins, went to the seventh hell. || 98 ||
Balabhadra, first was a king named Vishakhabhuti, then became a muni and a deva in the Maha Shukra heaven, then, falling from there, became Balabhadra named Vijay, and then, destroying the world, attained the state of Paramatma. || 99 ||
Pratinarayana, first was a king named Vishakhanandi, then, losing his glory, died and wandered in the world for a long time, then became a Vidyadhara named Ashvagriva, who, being an enemy of Triprishtha Narayana, attained the downward path, the hellish path. || 100 ||
Thus, in the Trishatshalakshan Mahapurana, compiled by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, the Purana of the Shreyansanatha Tirthankara, Triprishtha Narayana, Vijay Balabhadra, and Ashvagriva Pratinarayana, the fifty-seventh chapter is complete.
-*:
1 There is a metrical error here, the correct reading should be 'vihatapra tapaka'.

Page #115:
---------------------------
## The Eighty-Fifth Chapter

This is Vasu, who is worthy of worship by Indra, or the son of Vasupujya. Vasupujya is worthy of worship by the virtuous, may he purify us with his knowledge. ||1||

In the Pushkarardha-dvipa, to the east of Mount Meru, on the southern bank of the Sita River, lies the country of Vatsakavati. In its highly renowned city of Ranapura, reigned the king named Padmottara. ||2||

His virtuous fame resided in the speech of all, his meritorious form in the eyes of all, and his righteous conduct in the minds of all. ||3||

Peace was in his speech, compassion in his heart, brilliance in his body, wisdom in his intellect, wealth in his giving, devotion to the Jina in his heart, and prowess in his enemies. ||4||

Just as the assemblies grow in a muni who follows the path of righteousness, so too did the people of this king prosper as he ruled the earth following the path of righteousness. ||5||

His virtues were his wealth, and his Lakshmi too loved virtues. With her, he enjoyed vast happiness without any hindrance. ||6||

One day, the Jina Yugandhara was seated on the beautiful mountain called Manohara. Padmottara, the king, went there and worshipped him with devotion, offering many hymns. ||7||

He listened to the Dharma with humility, and contemplated the Anupreksha. From contemplating the Anupreksha, he developed three kinds of detachment: from the world, the body, and enjoyment. Having attained detachment, he contemplated again. ||8||

He thought, "This Lakshmi is a form of illusion, happiness and sorrow are temporary, life is until death, and this wicked body is full of diseases." ||9||

"Therefore, what is there to love in all this? Now, I will leave this terrifying cycle of birth and death, relying on this opportunity that has presented itself." ||10||

Thinking thus, he entrusted the kingdom to his son, Dhanamitra, and went with many kings to purify his soul. ||11||

Padmottara, the muni, with his pure mind, studied the eleven Angas and attained purity of vision. ||12||

Page #116:
---------------------------
85
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Mahaa-Shukra became the Indra in the Mahaa-Shukra Vimaana. His lifespan was the measure of sixteen oceans and his body was four hands tall. || 13 || He was called Padma-Leshya, he breathed once every eight months, he was always content, and he ate a mental meal once every sixteen thousand years. || 14 || He always enjoyed the sound of the celestial nymphs, his knowledge extended to the fourth earth, and his power, strength, and brilliance also extended to the fourth earth. || 15 || He was always delighted by the sweet words, songs, and music of the celestial nymphs. Finally, he was inspired by the cycles of time and was about to come here. || 16 ||
At that time, in the city of Champa in the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa, there lived a king named Vasupujya, who was from the Anga country. He was a descendant of Ikshvaku and belonged to the Kashyapa gotra. His beloved wife was named Jayavati. Jayavati received the honor of a rain of jewels. Afterwards, on the sixth day of the dark fortnight of Ashadha, in the twenty-fourth Shatabhisha Nakshatra, she saw sixteen dreams. Knowing their meaning from her husband, she was very pleased. After eight months had passed, in the ninth month of Phalguna, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, in the Varuna Yoga, she gave birth to a son who was the best of the gods, who was for the benefit of all beings, and who was born happily. || 17-20 ||
The gods, led by Saudharma, took him to Mount Sumeru and bathed him with water brought from the ocean of milk in pitchers. They adorned him with ornaments, named him Vasupujya, brought him back home, and celebrated many festivals. Then they went to their own abodes. || 21-22 ||
When the distance of sixty-four oceans had passed from the Shreyamsa-Nath Tirthankara's tirtha, and when the lineage of dharma was broken in the third part of the last palya, then Vasupujya Bhagavan was born. His lifespan was also included in this distance. He was seventy dhanus tall, his lifespan was seventy-two lakh years, and his body had the radiance of saffron. || 23-24 ||
Just as a moist field, which is suitable for frogs to lick, is the cause of the growth of the seeds of eighteen types of desired grains, so this king was the cause of the growth of virtues. || 25 ||
Just as all types of grains, which benefit the world, produce excellent fruit when they receive the desired rain called Sama, so all virtues 
1 Varune Yoge Kha, Ga. 2 Dharma-santatau Ka, Ga, Gha. 3 Meka-lehya La.

Page #117:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter of the Parshvanatha Charitra

**Verse 27:**  A period of rain lasting for six days is called *tray*, eighty days is called *kanashikara*, and sixty days of rain interspersed with sunshine is called *samavristhi*.

**Verse 28:**  The qualities of the *Harihara* and others have become insignificant, but these qualities have become prominent in Vasupujya Bhagavan. This is appropriate, because a special abode does not enhance the special qualities of anyone.

**Verse 29:**  Since all things are made of qualities, and are filled with qualities, the destruction of qualities would lead to the destruction of the object itself.  Knowing this, the wise Vasupujya Bhagavan carefully nurtured all qualities.

**Verse 30:**  When eighteen lakh years of his youth had passed, the wise Bhagavan, detached from the world, began to contemplate the true nature of things within his mind.

**Verse 31:**  This foolish being, attached to worldly objects, binds his own soul through his own actions, and experiences four types of suffering due to four types of bondage. He wanders in this endless forest of samsara. Now, I have attained the right path, which reveals the supreme qualities through the attainment of *kala* and other *labdhis*. Therefore, I should attain the liberation, the *sadgati*.

**Verse 32:**  Let the body be pure, stable, beautiful, free from disease, long-lasting, free from obstacles, and constantly provided with the means of happiness.

**Verse 33:**  But it is certain that the separation from all these things is inevitable. This sensual pleasure is in the form of attachment. An attached being binds himself with karma, and bondage is the cause of samsara.

**Verse 34:**  Samsara is in the form of the four *gatis*, and all four *gatis* are the givers of both suffering and happiness. Therefore, what is the use of this samsara for me? It is something that should be abandoned by the wise.

**Verse 35:**  While Bhagavan was contemplating this, the worldly gods came and began to praise him. The gods performed the *abhisheka* ceremony, adorned him with ornaments, and celebrated various festivals during the *diksha-kalyanak*.

**Verse 36:**  King Vasupujya, mounted on a palanquin carried by the gods, went to the beautiful garden called *Manoharo-dyan*. There, he observed a two-day fast, and on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of *Phalguna*, under the *Visakha* constellation, he accepted the *samayika* vow, and became a holder of *manahparyaya-jnana*.

**Verse 37:**  Along with him, six hundred and seventy-six kings, who knew the ultimate truth, also took *diksha* with great joy.

**Verse 38:**  On the second day, they entered the great city of *Andhas* for food. There, a king named *Sundara*, whose complexion was like gold, offered them food.

**Verse 39:**  And in the year of the *Pancha-ascharya*, after the passing of *Sri Vasupujya*, his disciple came to the *diksha-vana*.

**Verse 40:**  This king's intellect became the best fruit-bearing one. 

**Verse 41:**  The rain of the *shat-gatap-megha* is called *mesha-vristhi*.

Page #118:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, the one who was known as Sopavaso, resided at the root of a Kadamba tree in the afternoon. On the second day of the bright fortnight of Magha, in the Visakha constellation, he became a Jina. || 42 || The chief Indra of the Saudharma heaven worshipped him at that very moment. Since his auspicious initiation was due to the rise of the name-karma, it cannot be described in detail. || 43 || He was worshipped by a group of sixty-six Ganadharas, surrounded by twelve hundred previous Dharis, with forty-nine thousand two hundred teachers praising his feet, five thousand four hundred Avadhijnani serving him, six thousand Kevalajnani accompanying him, ten thousand monks adorned with the brilliance of Vikriya Riddhi, six thousand Manahparyayajnani honoring his lotus feet, and four thousand two hundred Vadi enhancing his excellent fame. Thus, he was adorned with seventy-two thousand monks, possessed one hundred and six thousand Aryikas, including the army, two hundred thousand Shravakas, four hundred thousand Shravikas, praised by countless gods and goddesses, and praised by countless Tiryanchas. || 44-46 || The Lord, along with all these, wandered through all the Arya-kshetras, satisfying them with the rain of Dharma, and gradually came to the city of Champa, where he stayed for a thousand years. When one month remained in his lifespan, he, with yogic restraint, resided on the land by the river Rajatamalik, adorning the peak of Mount Mandara, in a beautiful garden, seated on a Paryanka-asana. On the fourteenth day of the bright fortnight of Bhadrapada, in the evening, in the Visakha constellation, he attained liberation along with eighty-nine monks. || 50-53 || The gods, skilled in service, worshipped the Lord with great celebration after the Nirvana Kalyanak. || 54 || If a king desiring victory achieves success through the six qualities of diplomacy, war, etc., well-employed, then why wouldn't the Lord, desiring liberation, achieve liberation through eighty-four lakh qualities? He certainly would. || 55 ||

Page #119:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

**Mālinī**

Both existence and non-existence can be expressed by a single word.
The three-fold nature should be combined with the negation of the fourth.
Thus, you have explained the seven-fold nature of all things.
How can you be a liar, O Vasupūjya? You are worthy of worship! || 56 ||

**Vasantatilakā**

Dharma is compassion, but how can it be with possessions?
Rain is beneficial to the earth, but how can it be with restrictions?
Therefore, you have taught the renunciation of both internal and external possessions.
O Vasupūjya Jinendra, you are worshipped for this renunciation. || 55 ||

**Pañcamacari**

In his first birth, he was the king of the Padmottara.
Then, he became Mahāśukra, the Indra of the heavens.
His feet were like lotuses to the bees, the gods.
Then, he became the Vasupūjya Jinendra, worshipped by the three worlds.
He ruled as a celibate, and he will grant you immeasurable happiness. || 58 ||

**Anuṣṭup**

In the tīrtha of Śrī Vasupūjya, there was a king named Dvipriṣṭha.
He was the lord of three regions, and the second of the Ardhacakrīs (Nārāyaṇas). || 59 ||

**Vṛttaka**

I will speak of his three births.
By hearing this, the worthy souls will experience great fear of the world. || 60 ||

In this Jambudvīpa, in the land of Bhārata, there was a city called Kanakapura.
Its king was named Suṣeṇa.
Suṣeṇa had a dancer named Guṇamañjarī. || 61 ||

She was beautiful, fortunate, and renowned for her skills in dance, song, and music.
She was like a second Sarasvatī, and all the kings desired her. || 62 ||

In the same land of Bhārata, there was a beautiful country called Malaya.
Its king was Vindhyaśakti, who lived in Vindhyapura. || 63 ||

**Explanation of the Seven-Fold Nature**

Something is sometimes real, sometimes unreal, sometimes both real and unreal, sometimes inexpressible, sometimes real and inexpressible, sometimes unreal and inexpressible, and sometimes both real and unreal and inexpressible.
Thus, O Bhagavan, you have explained the seven-fold nature of every thing.
Therefore, you are known as a truth-speaker.
O Vasupūjya Deva, why should you not be worshipped? You are worthy of worship! || 56 ||

**Explanation of Dharma and Compassion**

Dharma is compassion, but how can it be with possessions?
Rain is beneficial to the earth, but how can it be with restrictions?
Therefore, you have taught the renunciation of both internal and external possessions.
O Vasupūjya Jinendra, you are worshipped for this renunciation. || 57 ||

**Explanation of the Three Births of Vasupūjya**

In his first birth, he was the king of the Padmottara.
Then, he became Mahāśukra, the Indra of the heavens.
His feet were like lotuses to the bees, the gods.
Then, he became the Vasupūjya Jinendra, worshipped by the three worlds.
He ruled as a celibate, and he will grant you immeasurable happiness. || 58 ||

**Explanation of the King Dvipriṣṭha**

In the tīrtha of Śrī Vasupūjya, there was a king named Dvipriṣṭha.
He was the lord of three regions, and the second of the Ardhacakrīs (Nārāyaṇas). || 59 ||

**Explanation of the Dancer Guṇamañjarī**

In this Jambudvīpa, in the land of Bhārata, there was a city called Kanakapura.
Its king was named Suṣeṇa.
Suṣeṇa had a dancer named Guṇamañjarī. || 61 ||

She was beautiful, fortunate, and renowned for her skills in dance, song, and music.
She was like a second Sarasvatī, and all the kings desired her. || 62 ||

**Explanation of the King Vindhyaśakti**

In the same land of Bhārata, there was a beautiful country called Malaya.
Its king was Vindhyaśakti, who lived in Vindhyapura. || 63 ||

Page #120:
---------------------------
2
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the six-footed bee is attracted to the flower of the mango tree, just as the king was attracted to the beauty of Gunamanjari. || 64 || With the desire to obtain the dancer, he sent a messenger to King Sushena, offering him jewels and other gifts to win his favor. || 65 || The messenger, with great speed, went to King Sushena, greeted him with due respect, offered him gifts, and said: || 66 || "There is a great jewel in your house, a renowned dancer. Your brother, Vindhyashakti, desires to see her." || 67 || "For this purpose, I have been sent, O King. Please send her to him, and I will bring her back to you." || 68 || Hearing these words, Sushena trembled with anger and said, "Go, go! What good are these arrogant words? What use are they to a fool?" || 69 || Thus, Sushena rebuked the messenger with harsh words. The messenger returned and informed Vindhyashakti of everything. || 70 || Hearing these words, Vindhyashakti was filled with anger and said, "Let it be! What is the harm?" Then, he consulted with his ministers. || 71 || He was a skilled warrior, a master of deceitful warfare, and a brave leader. He quickly gathered his army and marched forth. || 72 || Vindhyashakti defeated King Sushena in battle and took the dancer by force. This is just, for when virtue departs, who does not take what they can? || 73 || Just as the breaking of a tooth hides the glory of an elephant, and the breaking of a tusk hides the glory of a lion, so too, the loss of honor hides the glory of a king. || 74 || King Sushena was heartbroken by this loss of honor. Just as a snake cannot move a single step after its back is broken, so too, he could not move from his place. || 75 || One day, he became disillusioned and listened to the teachings of the renunciate, Suvrata Jina. With a pure heart, he realized the nature of Dharma and thought, "It must have been some sin of mine that caused Vindhyashakti to defeat me." With this thought, he resolved to destroy the enemy of sin. || 76-77 || And he took initiation from the same Jina, 
1. The messenger was a man of few words. 2. He informed Vindhyashakti. 3. Then he took. 4. He was disillusioned.

Page #121:
---------------------------
## The Eighty-Fifth Chapter

In the **Vimana** named **Anupama** of the **Kalpa** **Pranata**, a being with an age equivalent to twenty oceans, blessed with eight **iddhis**, became a god. || 79 ||

Here in **Bharata**, a king named **Vayuratha** resided in the great city of **Mahapur**. He enjoyed the prosperity of his kingdom for a long time. || 80 ||

Hearing the teachings of the **Jina** named **Suvrata**, this king, a knower of truth, became detached. He established his son **Ghanaratha** on the throne and went to practice **tapas**. || 81 ||

After studying all the scriptures and performing the highest **tapas**, he became the **Indra** of the **Vimana** named **Anuttara** in the same **Kalpa**. || 82 ||

Then, in this very **Bharata**, he was reborn as the son of the king of **Dwaravati**, named **Brahma**, and his queen **Subhadra**. He was known as **Achalastoka**. || 83 ||

Similarly, **Sushena** was born as the son of the same king **Brahma** and his other queen **Usha**. He was named **Dwiprashtha**. His body was seventy **dhanus** tall, and his lifespan was seventy-two lakh years. He was the leader of the **Ikshvaku** dynasty, enjoying the finest pleasures of kings. || 84-85 ||

**Balabhadra** and **Narayana**, with radiance like **Kunda** flowers and **Indranila** gems, appeared like the confluence of the **Ganga** and **Yamuna** when they met. || 86 ||

These two virtuous beings, like two **Shravakas** sharing the **Saraswati** given by their teacher, enjoyed the earth without division. || 87 ||

There was no difference between them, having studied all the scriptures. This is indeed praiseworthy, as it is the same state of being that is praised even when there is a union of **Lakshmi** and a woman. || 88 ||

These two were stable, very tall, and white and blue in color. They appeared beautiful, like the **Kailasa** and **Anjanagiri** mountains coming together. || 89 ||

Here, **Vindhyashakti**, like a **Ghati Yantra**, wandered in the ocean of existence for a long time. Finally, after gaining some merit, he was born as the son of **Shridhara**, the king of **Bhogavardhana**, a city in **Bharata**. He was known as **Taraka**. || 90-91 ||

He possessed **Lakshmi** with radiant brilliance, residing in **Bharata**. He was a terror to all **Vidyadharas** and earth-dwellers, due to the fear of his **chakra**. || 92 ||

Page #122:
---------------------------
64
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Let other matters be aside, I believe that - due to his fear, even the sun's light became dim, therefore Lakshmi never appeared happy even in lotuses. 63
Just as the fierce Rahu is the enemy of the full moon, similarly, the fierce-natured Tarak was the enemy of the path of ancient kings. 64
Just as the embryos of the cloud-masses fall due to the influence of a cruel planet, similarly, the embryos of pregnant women fall due to the fear arising from the mention of Tarak's name. 65
That Tarak, whose complexion was as dark as ink, always searched for enemies, and when he did not find any, it seemed as if he had become dark due to the smoke of his prowess-like fire. 66
That Tarak, who has tormented all the Kshatriyas and who is as unbearable as the sun in the summer season, has finally faced downfall, so it is right, because how can the wealth of such people remain stable? 67
That Tarak, who possessed the sovereignty of the three undivided parts, was motivated by intense opposition from past lives, and could not bear the growth of Dwiprashthanarayana and Achal Balabhadra. He thought, "I have made all the kings and farmers pay taxes, but these two brothers do not pay taxes like Brahmanas. Not only that, they are also filled with wicked pride. Who can tolerate a venomous snake growing in their own house?" 68-100
These two are in the category of enemies who deserve to be destroyed by me, and they are also corrupted by their nature, therefore, I will surely destroy them by any means, by accusing them. 101
Thinking this way, he sent a messenger who was fond of quarrels and spoke harsh words, and that wicked messenger went to those two brothers and said, "The great king Tarak, who kills enemies, has ordered that the big, famous, fragrant elephant in your house be sent to us immediately, otherwise, I will cut off your heads and forcibly take that elephant with my victorious army." 102-104
Hearing these rude and unbearable words spoken by that quarrelsome messenger, Achal Balabhadra, who was as stable as a mountain, generous, and possessed a noble nature, said, "What is an elephant? Let the great king Tarak come with his army. We will give him something else, by which he will attain health." 105
1 Vikasmira Lo. 2 Puraana Bhootamargasya Lo. 3 Darpitam Gho. Lo. 4 Dushtavaashi-Lo. 5 Ityupaayam Lo. 6 Vaarako Ko.

Page #123:
---------------------------
## The Eighty-Fifth Chapter

65

...Thus, with grave words, Achal Balabhadra dismissed the messenger. The messenger, like the wind, ignited his anger. ||10||

Hearing this, Tarak, ignited by anger, blazed like fire. He said to his brothers, "These two are like moths drawn to my anger." ||108||

Without consulting his advisors, Tarak, considering himself all-powerful, set out to meet death. ||109||

Facing the unjust, the foolish Tarak, with his six-fold army, conquered the entire earth and reached the two brothers, who were about to rise. ||110||

He violated all norms, conquering even the ocean of the end of time. Thus, the extremely wicked Tarak, with his army-like tidal wave, quickly surrounded the cities of Achal and Dviprith. ||111-112||

Just as a mountain effortlessly stops the waves of water, so too did Achal, steadfast like a mountain, effortlessly stop Tarak's army with his own. ||113||

Like a lion cub attacking a maddened elephant, Dviprith, with his bold nature, attacked the powerful enemy with the help of his valor alone. ||114||

Tarak, though fighting for a long time, was unable to defeat Dviprith. Finally, he hurled his discus, like the wheel of Yama, the god of death. ||115||

The discus circled Dviprith and settled on the right arm of the beloved Lakshmi. With that discus, he sent Tarak to hell. ||116||

At that moment, Dviprith became the lord of seven precious jewels and three parts of the earth. He became Achal Balabhadra, obtaining four jewels. ||117||

Conquering the enemy kings, they achieved victory in all directions. After bowing to Sri Vasupujya Swami, they entered their own city. ||118||

For a long time, they ruled over the three parts of the earth, enjoying various pleasures. At the end of their lifespan, Dviprith went to the seventh hell. ||119||

Grief-stricken by his brother's loss, Achal sought refuge in Sri Vasupujya Swami, embraced restraint, and attained union with the goddess of liberation. ||120||

They both, relying on the single seed of virtue, like the earth, attained their rise, having earned their true nature. One, like a tree bearing fruit, flourished, while the other, with a rootless base, remained fruitless below. ||121||

...They will give the elephant and other things so that they can obtain health and well-being (the word "healthy" is derived from "स्वः स्वर्गे तिष्ठतीति स्वस्थः" - "one who resides in heaven is healthy," with the "स" being dropped according to the rule "शर्परि खरि विसर्गलोपो वा वक्तव्यः" - "the "स" is dropped in the words "शर्परि," "खरि," and "विसर्ग"). The state of being healthy is called "health." ||106||

Page #124:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

66
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Maalini
This, as per the rules of the scriptures, has been compiled in this two-sided book. Thinking about it every day, those with great intellect, abandoning their worldly duties and sins, should engage in the act of **punya**, which is the treasure of all happiness. || 121 ||

In the city of Kanakapur in this Bharat Kshetra, King Sushena was famous. Then, after engaging in **tapasya**, he became a god in the fourteenth heaven. After that, he became the protector of the three continents as **Dviprishtha**, a semi-chakravartin. Then, due to the burden of **parigraha**, he died and went to the seventh hell. || 122 ||

**Vamsasthavrittam**
In the city of Mahapur, King Vayuratha became a king, then, after attaining excellent **charitra**, he went to the **Anuttara Vimana** in the same **Pranat Svarga**. After that, in the city of Dwaravati, he became **Achal** named **Balabhadra**, and finally, after attaining **nirvana**, he became worthy of worship by the three worlds. || 123 ||

**Vasantatilaka**
In the famous city of Vindhyanagar, he was born as King **Vindhyashakti**. Wandering in the forest of existence for a long time, he accumulated a little **punya**. He became King **Taraka** of the city of **Shribhogavardhanapur**. Finally, he became the enemy of **Dviprishtha Narayana** and was killed by him. Due to the rise of great sin, he was born as a **naraki** in the last earth. || 124 ||

Thus, in the **Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana Sangraha**, composed by **Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya**, the **Vasupujya Jinendra**, **Dviprishtha Narayana**, **Achal Balabhadra**, and **Taraka Pratinarayana** Puranas, the 58th chapter is complete. +++++

One who has great **ahamkara** and **papa** is **mahaanhaa** (great sinner). || 120 ||

By thinking that all the events in the lives of **Dviprishtha** and **Achal** are due to their **karma**, those who are **Arya Purusha** with great intellect should abandon **papa** and engage in **punya**, which is the treasure of all happiness. || 121 ||

++++

Page #125:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-First Chapter

The world appears pure to the pure, and the pure acts purely. He whose mind is pure, is pure himself. ||1||

In the western part of the Dhataki-khanda, in the land of Ramyakavati, situated on the southern bank of the Sita river, ruled the great king Padmasena. ||2||

He was like a Kalpa-vriksha to his people, fulfilling their every desire. ||3||

Scholars say that his life story is an example of the principles of Dharma, as described in the scriptures, which deal with the division of one's own and others' possessions. ||4||

During his reign, the people engaged in their respective professions, earning and enjoying their wealth, while the king protected them from their enemies. ||5||

The people never violated the law, nor did the king violate the people. The three goals of life (Dharma, Artha, Kama) never violated each other. ||6||

One day, King Padmasena, while in the Pritikara forest, in the presence of the Kevali, the omniscient, learned the nature of Dharma and also learned that he had only two more births remaining. ||7||

At that moment, he celebrated as if he had become a Tirthankara himself. He gave his kingdom to his son Padmanabha and began to practice intense austerities. ||8||

He studied the eleven Angas and attained firm faith in them. He cultivated the sixteen causes of liberation, including Darshan-vishuddhi, and thus bound himself to the nature of a Tirthankara. He also accumulated other types of merit as needed. At the end of his life, he performed the four acts of worship and attained the Indra-position in the Sahasrar heaven, known as Sahasrar. ||9||

He lived for eighteen Sagaras, his body was one Dhanush (four hands) tall. He had the least amount of white karma, both in matter and in mind. He breathed once every nine months and took mental nourishment once every eighteen thousand years. He was satisfied by simply seeing the forms of the celestial nymphs. His knowledge extended to the fourth earth, and his radiance and other qualities also extended that far. He was endowed with the qualities of Aṇimā, Mahimā, etc. ||10||

He enjoyed great happiness for a long time, seeing the beautiful faces of the celestial nymphs, who were filled with the nectar of love. ||13||

Page #126:
---------------------------
## Chapter 18

The great Indra, having descended from the heavenly realm, was about to arrive in this human realm. At that time, in the city of Kampilya, in the land of Bharata, King Kritavarman, a descendant of Purudeva, ruled. His renowned queen was Jayashyama, worthy of worship by Indra and other gods, adorned with riches like the earth itself. 

On the tenth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Jyeshtha, in the constellation Uttarabhadrapada, she saw sixteen auspicious dreams. At that very moment, she saw an elephant entering her mouth-lotus, and she inquired about the meaning of these dreams from the king. 

Then, the gods, having perceived the auspiciousness of the event through the trembling of their seats, descended from heaven and performed the first auspicious ceremony for the womb. 

Just as the heart of a poor man rejoices with the increase of wealth, so too did the hearts of the relatives rejoice with the growing fetus of Queen Jayashyama. 

In this world, even the birth of an ordinary son brings joy. What then to say of the birth of a son whose arrival had already humbled even Indra and the other gods? 

On the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Magha (according to the Kha and Ga manuscripts, on the fourteenth day), in the Ahirdhvaja yoga, Queen Jayashyama gave birth to the Lord, the possessor of three knowledges, the master of the three worlds, and the bearer of pure radiance. 

After his birth and coronation, all the gods named him Vimala-vahana and praised him. 

After the pilgrimage of Vasupujya, when thirty oceans of years had passed and the Dharma had been destroyed in the last part of the Palyopam, the Lord Vimala-vahana was born. His lifespan was included within this period. 

His lifespan was sixty lakh years, his body sixty bows tall, his complexion like gold, and he was adorned as if he were the very embodiment of all virtues. 

The soul of the Lord Vimala-vahana, who purified all beings and was supremely virtuous, was purified by his coronation after fifteen lakh years of his childhood. 

Lakshmi was his companion, fame had accompanied him from past lives, Saraswati was born with him, and Vira-Lakshmi herself had embraced him. 

The virtues of truth and others were flourishing in him, and even the great sages sought his presence. What further description of them is possible?

Page #127:
---------------------------
What greater praise could there be than this? || 27 ||

Who can describe the infinite bliss of the pure Vimalavāhana, who is about to attain the infinite bliss of liberation, due to his extreme purity, just a few days later? || 28 ||

When he attained Kevala Jnana, all the Indras worshipped his lotus feet, and therefore he was called Devādhideva. || 29 ||

The pure fame of Vimalavāhana, the lord of Lakshmi, was illuminating the directions like the white lotus or the moon, and was making the sky like the flower of the Kaśa. || 30 ||

Thus, thirty lakh years passed for the Lord, enjoying the pleasures born in the six seasons. || 31 ||

One day, in the Hemant season, when all the directions, earth, trees, and mountains were covered with snow, he saw the beauty of the snow melting instantly. || 32 ||

This caused him to become detached from the world at that very moment, he remembered all the events of his previous birth, and he became extremely distressed like a sick person, thinking about the loss of his pride. || 33 ||

He thought, "What is the use of these three Samyag Jnanas, because they all have limits - their subject matter is finite, and what is the benefit of this viriya, which does not attain the highest state?" || 34 ||

"Since there is the rise of the Pratikyanāvarana karma, I do not even have a trace of my character, and there is a lot of attachment and greed, therefore all four types of bondage are present." || 35 ||

"There is still pride, and the Nirjara is very little. Oh! The greatness of delusion, that I am still intoxicated with these worldly things." || 36 ||

"Look at my audacity, that I am still enjoying these terrible pleasures, like the body of a serpent or a hood. This enjoyment is now being received by me due to the rise of meritorious karma." || 37 ||

"So, until this meritorious karma ends, how can I attain infinite bliss?" Thus, Vimalavāhana thought in his heart, with the rise of pure knowledge. || 38 ||

At that time, the Laukāntika Devas, including Sarasvat, who had come, praised him, and other Devas celebrated the Abhishek festival that takes place during the Diksha Kalyanak. || 39 ||

Then, surrounded by Devas, the Lord mounted a palanquin called Devadatta, and went to the Sahetuka forest, where he took the vow of a two-day fast and became initiated. || 40 ||

He took this initiation on the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, with a thousand and a half kings present, and attained the knowledge of the four truths. || 41 ||

Page #128:
---------------------------
## Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

In the second day, the Lord entered the city of Nandana for food. King Jay, whose radiance was like gold, gave him food.  He attained the five wonders, for what is not attainable through the gift of a worthy recipient?  He took the Samayika vow and practiced restraint with a pure mind.  

After three years had passed, the great sage, having taken a two-day fast, sat in meditation at the foot of a Jambu tree in his own ordination grove.  

On the sixth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Magha, in the late afternoon, on the auspicious star of his ordination, he destroyed his karmas and attained Kevala Jnana.  He immediately became aware of all movable and immovable things.  At that very moment, the Indra of the gods, with their crowns and faces bowed, arrived.  They manifested the eight principal miracles, including the divine drum, and he, having received them, sat on the lion throne within the fragrant chamber.  

He was surrounded by fifty-five groups of leaders, including Mandara, and by eleven hundred revered predecessors.  He was adorned by thirty-six thousand five hundred teachers, and honored by four thousand eight hundred knowers of all three types of knowledge.  He was accompanied by five thousand five hundred Kevala Jnani, and his assembly was increased by nine thousand possessors of the power of transformation.  He was surrounded by five thousand five hundred possessors of Manahparyaya Jnana, and he was accompanied by three thousand six hundred debaters.  Sixty-eight thousand monks praised him, and one hundred thousand three thousand Aryikas worshipped him, including Padma.  He was accompanied by one hundred thousand Shravakas and honored by four hundred thousand Shravikas.  Besides these, he was accompanied by countless gods and goddesses, and by a countable number of animals.  Thus, he constantly wandered in the fields of Dharma, and satisfied the Bhavya grains, which were withered by the scorching heat of the world.  Finally, he went and sat on the summit of Sammed Shikhar, where he practiced Yoga Nirodha for a month.  

He took the Pratima Yoga with eight thousand six hundred monks, and on the eighth day of the dark fortnight of Ashadha, in the early morning, under the Uttarashadha star, he quickly performed the Samudghata and took the Shukla Dhyana, called "Sookshma Kriya Pratipati."  He immediately transitioned from the state of Sayoga to the state of Prayoga, and thus attained Moksha, just as one attains health after illness.

Page #129:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Verse 57:**

From that time onwards, the eighth day of the dark fortnight of Ashadha, known as Kala Ashtami, has been revered by the wise.  Following this tradition, even the misguided ones worship it.

**Verse 58:**

At that time, the gods, led by Saudharma, came and performed the final rites for him. They paid their respects with meaningful hymns of praise for the liberated one.

**Verse 59:**

The soul, constantly accumulating impurities due to the accumulation of sins like violence, remains trapped in the cycle of birth and death even with good deeds. Therefore, one should strive to purify their qualities, free from the duality of good and bad. Today, I, having attained pure intellect and the understanding of pure conduct, purify my qualities, removing them from the duality of good and bad.  Thus, the pure Vimalavahan, who had attained the white meditation, bore his meaningful name.

**Verse 60:**

He is the elephant of the righteous path, whose two tusks are right faith and right knowledge, whose pure body is made of virtues, whose feet are the four forms of worship, and whose trunk is vast Dharma.  He, Vimalavahan, inspired this elephant to destroy the enemy of sin, and thus he is called Vimalavahan (one who possesses a pure vehicle).

**Verse 61:**

He who was once the king Padma Sena, who destroyed the army of his enemies, then became the Indra of the eighth heaven, revered by the assembly of gods and filled with clear happiness.  After that, he became Vimalavahan Jinendra, the holder of vast, pure fame and the lord of the entire earth.  May the thirteenth Tirthankara, Vimalanatha, be well for your satisfaction.

**Verse 62:**

O noble beings! You who have destroyed all your faults through your unwavering meditation, whose understanding is free from the limitations of gradual progression, action, and disappearance, whose form is pure and spotless, and who are the recipients of fame and praise, bow down to the attainment of purity with devotion and reverence. 

**Verse 55-56:**

The sick person attains health (a state free from illness).

Page #130:
---------------------------
## Chapter 102: The Tale of Dharma and Swayambhu

**The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

In the Tirtha of Vimalnath, there were two sons of Sabjata, Ramakeshava and Dharma Swayambhu. Their story is told here. 

In the Videha region of the west, there was a king named Mitra-nandi. He had brought all the land suitable for his enjoyment under his control. 

His people loved him, and he protected them. They both prospered because of each other. This is how it should be, for self-interest is inherent in altruism. 

For this wise king, the enemy's army was like his own. And for one whose mind is like a wheel, constantly turning, even his own army becomes like the enemy's when the order is broken. 

This king was never satisfied until he had satisfied all his people. This is how it should be, for those who practice altruism find their own satisfaction in the satisfaction of others. 

One day, this wise king went to the Jina, Suvrata, and hearing the Dharma, he realized the impermanence of his body and possessions. 

He thought, "It is a great sorrow that beings of this world, through their attachment to possessions, accumulate sins and suffer, yet they do not attain the state of non-attachment. They do not become Digambara, renouncing all possessions. It is a great wonder that they do not even understand this obvious truth."

Thus, renouncing the world, he took up the supreme practice of self-control. At the end of his life, he renounced everything and became the Ahamindra, the king of the thirty-three heavens, with a lifespan of thirty-three sagaras. 

From there, through the power of karma, a son named Dharma was born to the queen Subhadra, wife of King Bhadra of Dwaravati. 

In the Kunala region of this Bharatavarsha, there was a city called Shravasti. There lived a king named Suketa, who was engrossed in worldly pleasures. 

Driven by the influence of bad karma, he was very lustful and addicted to gambling. Though his ministers and relatives, who wished him well, repeatedly advised him against it, he continued to gamble, fueled by their encouragement. As a result of his karma, he lost his kingdom, wealth, strength, and queen. 

Anger, harsh words, and lust are the four vices that lead to destruction. The wise say that there is no other vice as harmful as these. 

**Salutation to Vimalavahana Bhagavan**

You who are free from the cycle of knowledge, senses, and mind, whose body is perfectly pure, and whose praises are sung by the gods, we offer you our heartfelt salutations for the sake of attaining purity.

Page #131:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-First Chapter

103

The truth that is spoken about the great virtues is lost first by one addicted to gambling. Shame, pride, family, happiness, courtesy, relatives, dharma, wealth, land, house, fame, parents, children, wives, and oneself are all lost. 

76

One addicted to gambling does not bathe, eat, or sleep due to excessive attachment. He does not gain wealth, but suffers in vain and accumulates many sinful deeds.

77

He performs wicked actions, becomes an enemy of all, begs from others, and engages in actions that are not worthy of him.

78

He is abandoned by his relatives and suffers punishment from the king. Who can even describe the faults of gambling?

79

King Suketa is an example of this, as he lost his kingdom due to gambling. Therefore, one who desires the welfare of both worlds should abandon gambling from afar.

80

Suketa, having lost everything, was overwhelmed with grief. He went to the feet of Sudarshana Acharya and listened to the Jina Agama.

81

He immediately renounced the world and took initiation, although his mind was not pure. He abandoned food due to grief and performed very difficult austerities.

82-83

After performing austerities for a long time, he realized at the end of his life that through these austerities, his skills, qualities, intelligence, and strength would manifest.

84

Having made this realization, he renounced the world and died a natural death, attaining the heaven of Lantava. There, he enjoyed heavenly pleasures for fourteen oceans.

85

From there, he descended to the earth and was born as the son of King Bhadra of the city of Dvaravati. He was named Swayambhu and was the most beloved son of the king.

86

Dharma was Balabhadra, and Swayambhu was Narayana. Both had great affection for each other and enjoyed the prosperity of the kingdom for a long time.

87

The powerful king who had won Suketa's kingdom in gambling in a previous life was reborn as King Madhu in the city of Ratnapura.

88

Due to the karmic residue of their previous birth, Swayambhu, with anger, cursed Madhu, saying that he would be deprived of even the slightest knowledge of the scriptures.

89

All the scriptures say that there is no vice as low as gambling among the three vices of alcohol, meat, and hunting, and the four vices of gambling, theft, prostitution, and adultery, which arise from lust.

75

1. For wealth, for the sake of wealth.
2. Sudarshana Acharya's feet.
3. Impure intention.

Page #132:
---------------------------
104
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
King Swayambhu, enraged by the mere mention of Madhuka, had killed the messengers of both and taken the gift for himself. || 90 ||
The Acharya says that the impressions born of love and hatred become permanent. Therefore, a self-knowing person should not harbor hatred for anyone. || 91 ||
Hearing the news of the messenger's death from Narada, Madhu, filled with anger, went to confront Rama and Keshava. || 92 ||
The two, skilled in warfare and filled with anger, were ready for battle. They swiftly approached Madhu, resembling Yama and Agni. || 93 ||
A fierce battle ensued between the two armies, a battle that seemed to destroy everything. It lasted for a long time, terrifying even the bravest. || 94 ||
Filled with anger, Madhu aimed at Swayambhu and swiftly hurled a blazing discus, intent on killing him. || 95 ||
The discus, moving swiftly, circled around Swayambhu and settled on his right arm. It seemed as if the sun had descended from the sky. || 96 ||
Swayambhu, filled with anger, hurled the discus back at his enemy. What is impossible for a virtuous person to achieve? || 97 ||
Keshava then gained dominion over half of the Bharata land and, like Indra, enjoyed it without hindrance, along with his family. || 98 ||
Madhu, abandoning his virtue, fell into the clutches of Rajas. Bound by his karma, he went to the Naraka called Tamas-tama. || 99 ||
Keshava, driven by his hatred, followed him. He too entered that Naraka, the result of his own evil deeds. || 100 ||
Balabhadra, his heart consumed by grief at the separation from Swayambhu, became weary of the cycle of birth and death and went to the pure-charioted Jina. || 101 ||
He embraced Samayika and restraint, becoming a leader among the restrained. He performed austerities without any attachment, as if he had made enmity with his own body. || 102 ||
Balabhadra, at that time, seemed like the sun. Just as the sun is round, so too was Balabhadra virtuous. Just as the sun is the embodiment of brilliance, so too was Balabhadra. || 103 ||

Page #133:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-First Chapter

**Verse 10:**

The foolish Self-born (Svayambhu) and King Madhu, blinded by gambling, went to the hell of suffering, accumulating sins.  Indeed, the pursuit of Dharma, Artha, and Kama (religion, wealth, and desire) through wrong conduct becomes the cause of the chain of suffering.

**Verse 105:**

Even for one who has performed great austerities, anger and other passions become a cause of bondage. This bondage becomes the cause of suffering born from great sins. Therefore, even one who is on the path of liberation should abandon this bondage, which is like the company of wicked people.

**Verse 106:**

Mālini, who had conquered his enemies, was the king named Mitra-nandī. He became the lord of the Uttara-vimāna, adorned with great vows and assemblies. From there, he descended to the earth and became Sudharma Balabhadra in the city of Dvāravati.  Finally, he attained the state of liberation, having realized his true nature.

**Verse 107:**

The Self-born was first the foolish king Su-ketu in the country of Kuṇāla. Then, after performing austerities, he became a god in the heaven of Lāntava, the abode of happiness.  Then, he became the lord of the wheel, like Yama, to destroy King Madhu.  Finally, he descended to the seventh earth due to the rise of sins.

**Verse 108:**

Now, in the Tirtha of this very pure Vimalavāhana Tirthankara, there were two Ganadharas named Meru and Mandara, who were very high, stable, and served by the gods.  Therefore, I will now narrate their story.

**Verse 103:**

Just as the sun, upon rising, destroys darkness, so too did Balabhadra, upon becoming a Muni, destroy the darkness of the inner being.  Just as the sun is pure, so too was Balabhadra pure, having been cleansed of the stains of karma.  And just as the sun moves through the sky without obstruction, so too did Balabhadra ascend to the forefront of the three worlds without obstruction.

Page #134:
---------------------------
106
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana, in the Aparavideha island, on the northern bank of the Sitodana river, in the Gandhamalini country, there reigned King Vitashoka. 109 || The king, having a wife named Sarvasri, had two sons, Sanjayanta and Jayanta, who were endowed with the qualities of princes. || 110 || These two, inspired by the renunciation of worldly pleasures after hearing the Dharma from the self-existent Tirthankara, in the Asoka forest, near the Tirthankara. || 111 || Giving his kingdom to his son, the wise Vijayanta, Sanjayanta, along with his father, embraced the path of renunciation. || 112 || In the seventh stage of renunciation, having destroyed all the karmas, Vijayanta, having attained perfect harmony and freedom from attachment, attained the state of Jinesvara. || 113 || Seeing the beauty and great wealth of the king of the earth, who had come to celebrate the attainment of Kevalgyan by his father, the sage Jayanta, due to the influence of that vision, became the king of the earth after his death. It is not difficult to obtain a thing of great value for a very small price. || 114-115 || One day, Sanjayanta Muni was seated in the Bhima forest, near the Manohara city, in the posture of the image. || 116 || From there, a Vidyadhara named Vidyudishta emerged. He was unable to control his anger, which arose from the memory of his past enmity. He, driven by that intense rage, carried away the Muni and left him in the deep waters of the rivers Kusumavati, Haravati, Suvarnavati, Gajavati, and Chandavega, which meet at the southern end of the mountain called Ila in the Bharat Kshetra. || 117-118 || Not only that, he also incited the innocent Vidyadharas with the following words. He said, "This is a great-bodied, man-eating, sinful demon. He is standing silently, ready to eat us all one by one. Let us all together kill this merciless, all-devouring, and all-hating demon with a multitude of weapons like arrows and spears. Look, he is hungry, his stomach is shrinking from hunger. If he is neglected, he will surely devour women, children, and animals in the night." || 119-122 || "Therefore, you should understand my words. Am I speaking in vain? Am I speaking falsely? Do I have any personal enmity with him?" || 123 || Thus, the birds, deceived by him, were again urged by him. Saying, "Yes," all the groups of weapons, terrified of death, || 124 || began to kill the virtuous, wise, and calm-minded, with great confidence and greed. || 125 ||

Page #135:
---------------------------
Ekoneṣaṣṭitama Parva

107. He (Jayanta Muni), though all-enduring, with a thunderbolt-like body and unshakable form, became motionless and attained nirvāṇa through pure meditation. 

127. The lords of the devas, impelled by devotion, all came together to perform the pūjā for the welfare of nirvāṇa.

128. The Nāgendra (Dharaṇendra), enraged by the sight of his elder brother's body, bound all the vidyādharas with the Nāga-pāśa (serpent-noose).

129. "There is no fault of ours, O deva. It is the wicked Vidyud-dṛṣṭra who, bringing him from Videha, has instilled fear in us."

130. "These have caused this unnecessary great calamity," say some discerning ones.

131. Hearing this, the lord of the Sāgara (Dharaṇendra), casting off his anger towards them, was about to throw the Vidyud-dṛṣṭra into the ocean along with his kinsmen.

132. Then the deva Ādityābha became the cause of the qualities of both of them, like the intermediary connection between a dhātu and a pratyaya.

133. "Though this one has committed a fault, O Nāganātha, please forgive him out of compassion. What anger can great beings have towards this insignificant creature?"

134-135. "In the time of the first Tīrthaṃkara, your lineage was created by giving the vidyās of the Vidyādharīśas. Is it not well-known even to children that one should not even nurture a poisonous tree, let alone cut it oneself?"

136-137. The Nāgendra replied, "This wicked one has unjustly killed my ascetic elder brother, so he must be killed by me. You cannot prevent my wish in this matter." The wise deva said, "Do you bear enmity towards one who is born in your own lineage? Is he not seen as your own mother in the cycle of saṃsāra?"

Page #136:
---------------------------
108
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, who is a relative and who is not?  Relatives and non-relatives are both impermanent.  In this world, why should there be attachment to anything?  || 139 ||
Your brother Sanjayanta punished the Vidyudedstra in a previous life for a crime he committed.  Now, he remembers that past life and has wronged the Muni. || 140 ||
This sinner sent your elder brother to the afterlife in the previous four births due to a great enmity. || 141 ||
In this birth, I consider this Vidyadhara to be a benefactor of the Muni, because by enduring the suffering caused by him, they have attained liberation. || 142 ||
Let this auspicious cause of liberation be.  Tell me, what is the retribution for the wrong done in the previous birth? || 143 ||
Hearing this, the serpent king, eager to know, asked Aditya, "Tell me that story, how was it?" || 144 ||
"Listen, with a pure mind, free from hatred towards this Vidyudedstra.  I will tell you that story in detail," said the deva. || 145 ||
In this Jambudvipa, in the land of Bharat, there was a king named Singhasen, the ruler of Singhapura.  His wife was a virtuous queen named Ramadatta. || 146 ||
The king's minister was named Sribhuthi, also known as Satyaghoṣa.  He was a learned Brahmin, well-versed in the scriptures, including the Shruti, Smriti, and Puranas. || 147 ||
In the city of Padma-khandapura, there lived a wealthy merchant named Sudatta.  His son, Bhadramitra, was born to his wife Sumitra.  He went to Ratnadvipa and earned many precious jewels. || 148 ||
He brought those jewels to Singhapura and decided to settle there.  He met the minister Satyaghoṣa and, with his consent, entrusted his jewels to him.  Then, he went to Padma-khandapura to fetch his relatives.  Upon his return, he asked Satyaghoṣa for his jewels, but blinded by greed, Satyaghoṣa denied knowing anything about them. || 149-151 ||
Bhadramitra cried out in the city, and Satyaghoṣa, to maintain his reputation, told everyone that the wicked thieves had stolen all his wealth.  Due to this grief, he...

Page #137:
---------------------------
The sixty-first chapter of the Pर्व

His heart was filled with sorrow and grief, arising from the loss of all his possessions. People called him a madman, believing his words to be true. || 153 ||

To prove his innocence, he swore an oath in front of the king, though he was far from righteous conduct, as instructed by the Dharma authorities. || 154 ||

Even though he was left destitute, Bhadramitra did not stop lamenting, repeatedly claiming that he had been cheated by this wicked, twice-born Brahmin. || 155 ||

O Satyaghosha, I considered you pure, adorned with all the virtues of a minister, with a noble lineage and other qualities. I believed you to be truly Satyaghosha, a beacon of truth. That's why I entrusted my treasure chest to your care. Why are you changing now? What is the reason for this change, and is it right to do all this? || 156 - 157 ||

What do you lack, thanks to the grace of Maharaja Singhsen? This entire kingdom, including the umbrella and the throne, is yours. || 158 ||

Why are you destroying your Dharma, fame, and greatness in vain? Don't you know the sin of betraying a trust, as mentioned in the scriptures? || 159 ||

This is the fruit of constantly studying the Arthashastra, to constantly deceive others and never be deceived yourself. || 160 ||

Or perhaps you misunderstand the meaning of the word "para" (other). You take it to mean "enemy" instead of "another." So, O Satyaghosha, am I truly your enemy? || 161 ||

What cunning is there in deceiving those who approach you with good intentions? What kind of heroism is it to kill someone who has fallen asleep in your lap? || 162 ||

O Sribhuti, you are possessed by the demon of great delusion. Don't destroy your future life. Give me back my treasure chest. || 163 ||

You know the nature of my jewels, their size, and their lineage. Why are you hiding them like this? || 164 ||

Thus, Bhadramitra would climb a tree every morning and cry out, lamenting his loss. This is right, for courageous and valiant men do not abandon their efforts even in difficult tasks. || 165 ||

Hearing his constant, monotonous cries, the queen thought, "This man always speaks the same words. It seems he is not mad." || 166 ||

The queen revealed this thought to the king, and by playing a game of dice with the minister, she won his sacred thread and his signet ring. || 167 ||

Then, with skillful words, she handed the signet ring to the queen mother, saying, "Give Bhadramitra's treasure chest to him." || 168 ||

Page #138:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

Having said this, the king, in private, instructed the nurse, "Go to the house of the minister Sribhuthi and tell his wife that I have sent you. Give her the casket for Bhadramitra. He has sent these two things for identification." Thus, deceiving her, the queen Ramdatta sent the nurse to the minister's house to retrieve the casket of jewels. 

The king then placed other jewels in the casket and called Bhadramitra to him in private. "Is this your casket?" he asked.

"Oh, king, this is indeed our casket, but some other precious jewels have been mixed in with it," Bhadramitra replied.

"These jewels are not mine, and these are mine," said Bhadramitra, a man of pure intellect and the best among the righteous, as he took only his own jewels.

The king was very pleased and bestowed upon Bhadramitra the position of a very wealthy merchant, along with the title "Satyaghoṣa" - making him the king's chief merchant.

"Satyaghoṣa, the minister, is a liar, a sinner, and has committed many sins. Therefore, he should be punished," the king declared, following the advice of the Dharma authorities.

Thus, the city guards, acting on the king's orders, decided upon three punishments for Sribhuthi, the minister: 1) all his wealth should be confiscated, 2) he should be struck thirty times with a vajramusti (iron fist) by a strong wrestler, and 3) he should be fed fresh cow dung from three bronze plates. The city guards then punished him with these three types of punishments.

Sribhuthi, filled with hatred for the king, died and was corrupted by the practice of harmful meditation. After death, he became a snake named Agandhana in the king's treasury.

Taking another's wealth unjustly is called stealing. It is considered to be of two types: natural and circumstantial.

Natural stealing arises from the inherent nature of a person, born from the influence of the kṣayā of greed and the rise of wicked competitors. A person with a natural inclination to steal will never be satisfied, even if he has crores of wealth in his house and spends crores. Just as everyone is afflicted by hunger and other afflictions, so too is he afflicted by the desire to steal.

When a person's expenses for his wife, children, etc., exceed his income, he may resort to stealing. This is due to the influence of greed and its harmful consequences.

Page #139:
---------------------------
One who commits both types of theft binds himself to an inauspicious lifespan and, through his wicked deeds, endures great suffering for a long time in a state of misery. || 182 || The thief loses his good qualities, his trust in wealth and possessions is destroyed, and he faces life-threatening calamities along with his friends and relatives. || 183 || Just as a creeper touched by fire quickly perishes, so too does the garland of fame, woven from the flowers of virtues, quickly perish due to theft. || 184 || Knowing all this, the foolish Satyaghoṣa (Śrībhūti) dared to commit this first natural theft. || 185 || Due to this theft, he was quickly dismissed from his ministerial post, he had to endure the aforementioned three severe punishments, and he was destined to fall into a state of misery bound by great sins. || 186 || Pondering the minister's misconduct in his heart, King Siṃhasena bestowed the ministerial post upon a Brahmin named Dharmil. || 187 || 

As time passed, one day, a wealthy merchant named Bhadramitra went to the mountain Vimalkāntāra in the forest of Asanā, where the Muni-raja Vardharma resided. Having heard the nature of Dharma, he donated a great deal of his wealth. His mother, Sumitrā, could not bear to see this great donation, so she became extremely angry and, in the end, died and became a tigress in the same forest of Asanā. || 188-190 || One day, Bhadramitra went to the forest of Asanā of his own accord. Seeing him, the tigress, with her wicked intentions, devoured her own son. It is right, for what is not consumed by beings in anger? || 191 || Bhadramitra, due to his affection, was reborn as the son of Queen Rāmadattā, named Siṃhacandrā, and his younger brother was Pūrṇacandra. Both these sons were very dear to the king. || 192 || One day, King Siṃhasena went to inspect his treasury, where the serpent named Agandhana, a being of Satyaghoṣa, bit him in anger. || 193 || The Garuda-daṇḍa, a Garuda, summoned all the serpents with a mantra and said, "Whoever among you is innocent, enter me, come out, and attain purity." || 194 || "Otherwise, I will punish you." Upon hearing this, all the serpents except Agandhana emerged from the fire without any pain, just as if they were emerging from a reservoir. || 195 ||

Page #140:
---------------------------
112
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, Agandhana, filled with anger and pride, was burnt in that fire and died. He was reborn as a deer in the Kalaka forest, filled with greed. ||19||
Similarly, at the end of his life, King Singhasena was reborn as a mad elephant named Ashanighosha in the Sallaki forest. ||197||
Singhachandra became the king, and his younger brother, Ajani, became the crown prince. They enjoyed the wealth of the kingdom, and time passed quickly for them, like a moment. ||198||
One day, when King Singhasena's death was announced, two nuns, Dantamati and Hiranyamati, who had taken vows of restraint, came to Queen Ramadatta. ||199||
Ramadatta also took vows of restraint in their presence. Grief-stricken, King Singhachandra went to the Muni Raja, named Purnchandra, and listened to his teachings. He pondered, "If this human life is wasted, how can there be rebirth? Is it just an illusion to hope for rebirth, or will we continue to wander through different births?" ||200-201||
Thinking this way, he appointed his younger brother, Purnchandra, as the king and took initiation himself. He abandoned all distractions and became pure. He attained the second stage of restraint, the seventh stage called "Aparamatta Virata." ||202||
Through his austerities, he gained the power of aerial flight and the knowledge of mind-reading. One day, Ramadatta was overjoyed to see Muni Singhachandra. ||203||
She worshipped him properly in the Manoharavana garden, inquired about the progress of his austerities, and finally, out of maternal affection, asked, "Purnchandra is enjoying worldly pleasures, abandoning dharma. Will he ever attain dharma?" ||204-205||
Muni Singhachandra replied, "Don't worry, he will surely accept your dharma or your teachings. Listen to the story of his past life." ||206||
In a village called Vridda, in the land of Kausala, there lived a Brahmin named Mrgayana. His wife's name was Madhura. ||207||
They had a daughter named Varuni. At the end of his life, Mrgayana was reborn as the daughter of King Divyabal of Saketa and his queen, Sumati. Her name was Hiranyavati. She was a virtuous woman. ||208||
1. The meaning is that they came together after hearing the news of his death.
2. "Samyama" is written as "Samyama" in K, G, and 50.
3. "San" is written as "San" in 20, Kh, G, Gh, S, and 0.
4. "Pramadaparimarjnat" is written as "Pramadaparimarjnat" in K and P.

Page #141:
---------------------------
The Sixty-First Parva
113
Madhura, the wife of the Brahmin Mrgayana, also passed away, and from them, both Purnachandra and Hiranyavati, you were born, named Ramadatta.  From your affection, Seth Bhadramitra had a son named Singhchandra.  This Purnachandra is the reincarnation of Varuni.  Your father received initiation from Bhadrabahu, and I received initiation from him, thus your father became the guru of both of us.
210-211
Your mother received initiation from Dantamati, and you received initiation from Hiranyavati.  Today, you have peace of all kinds.  King Singhsen was bitten by a snake and died, becoming an elephant named Ashanighosha in the forest.  One day, this intoxicated elephant was roaming in the forest, and I was there.  Seeing me, he wanted to kill me.  I had the power of aerial locomotion, so I stood in the sky and explained to him his past life.  He understood everything properly, and that noble being immediately took the vows of Samyama and Asamyam.
212-214
Now his mind is completely peaceful, he remains detached, constantly contemplating the impermanence of the body and other things, and he continuously observes fasts for a month, taking only dry leaves as his food.
215
In this way, that great-souled elephant, performing severe austerities for a long time, became very weak.  One day, he went to drink water at the bank of the river Yupakesarini.  Seeing him, the being who had become a deer and then a cock-snake in the life of Sribhutisatyaghoṣa, climbed onto the elephant's head and bit him.  He died from the poison.  Since he died in a state of meditation, he became a god named Ravipriya in the Sahasrar heaven.  Dharmila, the Brahmin, whom King Singhsen had made his minister after Sribhutisatyaghoṣa, became a monkey in the same forest at the end of his life.  This monkey was friendly with the aforementioned elephant, so he killed the cock-snake, causing it to be born in the third hell.  The hunter, Shrigalaavan, broke the elephant's two tusks and extracted very bright pearls from them, which he gave to the Seth Dhanamitra.  The great merchant Dhanamitra gave those two tusks and pearls to King Purnachandra.
216-221
King Purnachandra had four legs made for his bed from those two tusks, and he wore a necklace made from the pearls.
222
That man is not completely foolish, or
1. Payakesarini (Kh.)
2. Krishbalah (Kh., L.)
3. Pur (L.)
4. Kukut (Kh., G.)
5. Kurkut (G.)
6. Trtiye Narake (Kh.)
7. Vigata Dhiryasya Sa Vidhih Murkha Ityartha
8. Achintayan.

Page #142:
---------------------------
114
This is the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, as narrated by Singhchandra. Ramadatta, understanding this, went to her son, Purnachandra, and explained it to him. || 22 || Having embraced the Dharma, he ruled for a long time. Ramadatta, out of love for her son, attained the end of her life span and went to the Maha Shukra heaven, in the Vimana called Bhaskara. || 225 || Purnachandra also went to the same heaven, in the Vimana called Vaidurya, as the deity Vaidurya. || 226 || Singhchandra, the Muni Indra, also attained Samadhi, being pure in mind, and became the Ahminndra in the Pritikara Vimana of the ninth Aveyaka. || 227 || Ramadatta's soul, having departed from the Maha Shukra heaven, was born as the daughter of Ativega, the Khageshin, in the city of Dharanitilaka, in the southern division. Her mother's name was Sulaksana. This daughter, named Shridhara, was given to the king of the Alaknagar, Darshaka, the Khageshin. || 228-229 || Purnachandra's soul, who had become the deity Vaidurya in the Vaidurya Vimana of the Maha Shukra heaven, departed from there and was born as the daughter of Shridhara, named Yashodhara, who was given to the king Suryavarta of the city of Pushkara. || 230 || King Shridhardeva, or Ashanighosha, the elephant, was born as the son of both Suryavarta and Yashodhara, named Rashmivega. Once, upon hearing the Dharma teachings from Muni Chandra, King Suryavarta went to perform tapasya. || 231 || Shridhara and Yashodhara, having received the Diksha from the Gunavati Aryika, also went to perform tapasya. || 232 || Once, Rashmivega went to see the Jin-alaya on the Siddhakoota. There, he saw the Charana-samyata Muni, named Harichandra. || 233 || Having heard the Dharma from him, he attained Samyagdarshan and Samyama, and became a Muni. He quickly attained the celestial chariot (Gaganacharana) power. || 234 || Once, Rashmivega Muni was residing in a cave called Kanchana. Seeing him, Shridhara and Yashodhara Aryikas bowed to him and sat there. || 235 || Meanwhile, Satyaghoṣa's soul, who had become a Naraki in the third Naraka, departed from there and, due to the rise of his sins, wandered in the world for a long time. Finally, he became a great serpent in the same forest. || 236 ||

Page #143:
---------------------------
The Sixty-First Chapter

Seeing those Āryikās and the Rasmivega Muni, who shone like the sun, the serpent swallowed them all in a fit of rage. The Āryikās, having attained Samadhi-Maraṇa, were born in the Rucak Vimana of the Kāpiṣṭha heaven, and the Muni was born as a deva in the Arka-Prabha Vimana of the same heaven. The serpent, due to the rise of his sins, reached the fourth earth, called Paṅka-Prabhā. || 237-238 ||

The life of Simha-Candra, descending from heaven, was born as the son of King Aparājita and his beautiful queen Sundaryā, in the city of Cakrapura on this Jambudvīpa. || 239 ||

Some time later, the life of Rasmivega also descended from heaven and was born as the son of King Aparājita and his other queen, Citramālā, named Vajrāyudha. || 240 ||

Āryikā Śrīdharā, descending from heaven, was born as the daughter of King Ativega, the ruler of the city of Dhāraṇī-Tilaka, and his beloved queen. She was complete with all auspicious marks and was known as Ratnamālā, a very famous daughter. This Ratnamālā later became the beloved of Vajrāyudha, bringing him joy. || 241-242 ||

And Yaśodharā, descending from heaven, was born as the son of Vajrāyudha and Ratnamālā, named Ratnāyudha. Thus, all of them began to experience the fruits of their past good deeds in this very life. || 243 ||

Hearing the Dharma-Upadesa from the Pihiṭāsrava Muni, King Aparājita, the holder of great wisdom, gave the kingdom to Cakrāyudha and took initiation. || 244 ||

Some time later, King Cakrāyudha, placing the burden of the kingdom on Vajrāyudha, went to his father and took initiation, attaining liberation in that very life. || 245 ||

Now, Vajrāyudha also placed the burden of the kingdom on Ratnāyudha and took initiation near Cakrāyudha. This is right, for what do those who possess the Sattvaguna not do? || 246 ||

Ratnāyudha was attached to pleasures. Therefore, abandoning the Dharma-kathā, he enjoyed the pleasures of the kingdom for a long time with great greed. || 247 ||

In the beautiful garden called Manorama, the great Muni Vajradanta was describing the Lokānuyoga. Hearing this, the wise elephant named Meghavijaya, belonging to the king, remembered his past life, and he took up Yoga, stopped eating meat and other things, and began to contemplate the sorrowful state of the world. || 248-249 ||

Seeing this, the king was worried. He called all the great ministers and physicians and asked them with great respect, "What ailment has befallen this elephant?" || 250 ||

Page #144:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
256 ||
Having considered and observed the disorders arising from the three humors, he remembered his caste by inference and from the scriptures. || 251 || Thus, the best of elephants, having obtained pure food from a worthy vessel, mixed with ghee, etc., ate it. || 252 || Then, the king, filled with wonder, went to the seer, Avadhi Vilocana. Addressing him as Vajradanta, he asked him the reason for this. || 253 || The muni said, "O king, listen to the account of this. In this Bharat, there was a king named Pritibhadra, the ruler of Chatrapura. || 254 || He had a son named Pritikara, born of his beautiful queen, Sundarya. His minister was Chitramati, whose wife was Kamala, like a lotus. || 255 || They had a son named Vichitramati. Having heard the Dharma from the Dharma-loving muni, the king and the minister's son, both weary of worldly pleasures, took to austerity. || 256 || The great muni, Pritikara, obtained the Siddhi called Kshirastravadha. || 257 || One day, they both went to Saketapur, one after the other. While wandering and observing the fast, the minister's son, the muni, stayed outside the city. || 258 || The king's son, Pritikara, went into the city for his daily rounds. Seeing him approaching his house, a courtesan named Buddhishena, with humility, bowed to him. || 259 || She said, "I am not from a family worthy of giving charity." With great sorrow, she condemned herself and asked the muni, "O muni, tell me, how do beings obtain a good family, good looks, etc.?" || 260 || The muni replied, "By giving up drinking, meat, etc." Then, he returned from the city. The muni, Vichitramati, asked him with respect, "Why did you stay in the city for so long?" || 261 || He narrated the whole story of his encounter with the courtesan. The next day, the minister's son, Vichitramati, went to the courtesan's house during his begging rounds. || 263 || Seeing him, she got up immediately and, bowing to him, asked him about Dharma with the same respect as before. || 264 || But the foolish Vichitramati spoke to her about love and lust. The courtesan understood his intentions and rejected him. || 265 || Filled with anger at being insulted, he, following the rules of the soup-science, went to Gandhamitra, the king of the city of Mansar. || 266 ||
1
196
? || 250 ||

Page #145:
---------------------------
Sārthasiddhiṃ samprapadin
So'sti gandhilasta stidāruṇaḥ | Prāgbhāge
Ekonashaṣṭitam parva vaśīkṛtya tato buddhiṣeṇā cātmakṛtāmunā | Sa vicitramatiḥ mṛtvā tavāyamabhavadgajaḥ || 267 || Bhasmin trilokapraśāsi cavaṇajātisamsmṛteḥ | Nivinṇo'yaṃ samāsana vineyo nāgrahīdvi dhām || 268 || Tyāgo bhogāya dharmasya kācāyaiva mahāmaṇeḥ | Jananyā iva dāsyathaṃ tasmāt tāhak tyajed budhaḥ || 269 || Iti tad bhabhugākarṇya pikām dharmadūṣakam | Dharma eva paraṃ mitram iti dharmarato'bhavat || 270 || Tada eva dattvā svaṃ rājya svaputrayai sya saṃyamam | Mātrā sahayuṣaḥ prānte kalpe'nte'nimisho'bhavat || 271 || Prācano nārakaḥ paraprabhāyā nirgatas ciraṃ | Nānāyonishu sambhramya nānāduḥkhāni nirviśan || 272 || Iha kṣatra pure dāruṇālyasya tanayo'bhavat | Māyā vyādhasya pāpena prāktanenāsidāruṇaḥ || 273 || Bane priyalgukhaṇḍālye pratimayogadhāriṇam | Vajrāyudhaṃ khalasta smillokāntaram ajīgamaṭ || 274 || Soṭhyā vyādhṛtakam tīvram upasarga masau muniḥ | Dharmadhyānena sarvārthasiddhiṃ samprapadīvadhīḥ || 275 || Sasamī pṛthivīṃ pāpād adhyavāsāti dāruṇaḥ | Prāgbhāge dhātakīkhaṇḍe videhe paścime mahān || 276 || Deśo'sti gandhilasta sminayodhyānagare tṛpaḥ | Ahadāso'bhavat tasya suvratā sukhadāyinī || 277 || Ratnamālā tayo rāsīt sūnurvīsabhayāyaḥ | Tasyaiva jinadāsāyām abhūd anāyudhaḥ sutaḥ || 278 || Nāmnā vibhīṣaṇo jāto tāvu bhau rāmakeśavau | Avibhajya śriyaṃ dīrghakālam bhuktvā yathōcitam || 279 || Kālantē keśavo'yāsi dvaddhvāyuḥ śarkarāprabhām | Sa halyapi nivṛtyante vāsitvā lāntavaṃ yayau || 280 || Ādityābhaḥ sa evāhaṃ dvitīyapṛthivī sthitam | Praviśya narakaṃ snehādv vibhīṣaṇam abodhayat || 281 ||

Page #146:
---------------------------
118
Having known the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, he then departed from this island to the city of Vijaya. He was the king of Ayodhya, the great city of the Airavata. || 282 || His queen was Susima, the daughter of Srivarma. Their son was Sri Dharma, who, upon reaching adulthood, took the vows of renunciation from the Muni Ananta. || 283 || In the Brahma Kalpa, he became a god, adorned with eight divine qualities. He was the lord of all attainments, the victor, and he was known as Vajrayudha. || 284 || Having come from the Brahma Kalpa, you, O Jayanta, became the lord of the earth, but due to the binding of karma, you were born as a Naga king, your right knowledge lost in delusion. || 285 || The being who was Satyaghoṣa, having departed from the seventh earth, became a serpent, a bearer of a wretched lifespan, and then went to the third hell. || 286 || From there, he departed and wandered through the realms of the Tiryancha and the stationary beings. In the forest of Bhutaraman, on the banks of the Airavati river, he was born as the son of Mrigashringa, a hunter, to the woman named Shakika, the wife of the sage Goshringa. He was detached and performed the five-fire penance. || 287 || While performing his penance, he saw the Vidyaadhara Anshumala, the king of the divine city of Tilka, and he made a binding of karma with him. || 288 || After death, he was born in the city of Gaganavallabha, in the northern range of the Vijayaadha mountain, as the son of the Vidyaadhara Vanadamshtra, the king of the city, and his queen, Vidyutrbha. He was named Vidyudamshtra, and due to the influence of his past enmity, he was bound by karma and will suffer for a long time, and will suffer further. || 289 || Thus, bound by karma, this being continues to change. The father becomes the son, the son becomes the mother, the mother becomes the brother, the brother becomes the sister, and the sister becomes the grandchild. This is the nature of the relationship of kinship in this world. Who has not wronged whom, and who has not benefited whom? || 290 || Therefore, do not bind yourself with sin by harboring enmity. O Naga king, O lord of the earth, abandon enmity, and let Vidyudamshtra be freed as well. || 291 || Thus, the king of the serpents was greatly comforted by the rain of nectar that was the words of the god. He said, "O god, by your grace, I have faith in the true Dharma. || 292 || But this Vidyudamshtra, who has committed this sin, has done so by the power of his knowledge. Therefore, I will take away his great knowledge, and the knowledge of his lineage." || 293 || Hearing these words, the god said to the lord of the serpents, "You should not do this." || 294 ||

Page #147:
---------------------------
## The One Hundred and Sixteenth Chapter

**116**

Even though he said this, the sons of this lineage will not attain great knowledge, but the women of this lineage will attain great knowledge near the Sanjayaant Bhaṭṭāraka. **298**

If these wicked people are not punished even this much, they will become arrogant and engage in evil deeds, and they will cause trouble for the virtuous in the future. **299**

This mountain was also very ashamed because of the Vidyaadharas' play, so it is called Hrimaan. He made a statue of his brother Sanjayaant Muni on this mountain. **300**

He pacified the Vidyuhasta with words of Dharma and justice, and after worshipping the Dev, he went to his own place. **301**

This Dev, at the end of his life, was born as the son of King Anantavirya and Queen Merumalini in the city of Mathura, and his name was Meru. **302**

The Dharanendra was born as the son of the same king and Queen Amitavati, and his name was Mandara. These two brothers were like Shukra and Brihaspati. **303**

Because they were very close and virtuous, they went to Vimala Vahan, heard about their past lives, and became his Ganadharas. **304**

Now, I will describe the lineage and births of each of them, starting with their names. **305**

The life of Singhsen was an Ashanighosha elephant, then he became Shridhara Dev, Rashmivega, Arka Prabha Dev, Maharaja Panayudh, Sarvarth Siddhi Devendra, and then he became Sanjayaant Kevali. In this way, Singhsen attained liberation in eight births. **306-307**

The life of Madhura was Ramdatta, Bhaskar Dev, Shridhara, Dev, Ratnamala, Achyut Dev, Vitabhaya, and Aditya Prabha Dev. He became the Ganadhara of Vimala Vahan, named Meru, and attained liberation from that birth with seven Siddhis. **308-309**

The life of Varuni was Purnchandra, Vaidurya Dev, Yashodhara, a Dev named Ruchak Prabha with great wealth in the Kapishtha heaven, Ratnayudh Dev, Vibhishan (who became a resident of the second hell due to his sins), Shridharma (a Dev in the Brahma heaven), Jayant, Dharanendra, and Mandara (a Ganadhara of Vimala Nath). He attained liberation from the ocean of births after attaining four knowledges. **310-312**

The life of Shribhuti (Satyaghosha) minister was...

**1** Prashanta K, G. **2** Matibhavali Vyakhya L.

Page #148:
---------------------------
## 020

**The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

**The Serpent, Chamar, Kurkut, Serpent, in the third hell, the suffering Naraki, the Python, in the fourth hell, the Naraki, the tremor and the stationary beings, many births, extremely terrible, in the seventh hell, the Naraki, the Serpent, the Naraki, wandering through many births, the deer-horned one, then died, the lightning-biting one, the king of birds, sinful, then became free from enmity and happy. **[313-315]**

**The merchant Bhadramitra's life, the lion-moon, the pleasing god, and the wheel-weapon, having destroyed the eight karmas, attained nirvana.** **[316]**

**Thus, these three beings, having been subjected to their own karmic results, for a long time, experienced high and low positions, sometimes experiencing happiness, and sometimes experiencing intense suffering without asking, but in the end, all three became free from sin and attained the supreme abode.** **[317]**

**Those great souls, who, having samata (equanimity) in their hearts, considered the terrible affliction caused by the wicked Vidyadhara as something that only a rare fortunate person would experience, thus thinking very well, and taking on the extremely pure white meditation, attained purity, those karma-free Sanjayanta masters, may you protect us all.** **[318]**

**Those who have conquered the sun and moon, and attained excellent brilliance, who are the masters of the group of munis, and who are the leaders of the Jain Agamas, full of nayas, those Meru and Mandara, the Ganadharas, may they always be worshipped by you, may you always worship them.** **[319]**

**Thus, in the collection of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, the Vimala Tirthankara, Dharma, Swayambhu, Madhu, Sanjayanta, Meru, and Mandara Ganadharas, the fifty-ninth chapter, the Merumandara Purana, is complete.** **[59]**

**1. Vidyudamshta Khagaadheeshah, ka, kha, ga, gha. 2. Prapannah, la.**

Page #149:
---------------------------
## The Sixtieth Chapter

The one who destroys infinite vices and is the mine of infinite virtues, the Jina, who destroys the lineage of internal darkness and transcends all limits, is our refuge. ||1||

In the eastern part of the Dhaataki-khand island, in the northern region of Mount Meru, there is a beautiful city called Arisht, which seems to be the abode of all wealth. ||2||

The king of that city was Padmaratha, who was himself the abode of Padma-Lakshmi due to his virtues. He ruled the earth for a long time, bringing great joy to his people. ||3||

The auspicious rise of the king, with its beautiful and comfortable resources, brought happiness to the beings. His auspicious rise was abundant and free from obstacles. ||4||

Therefore, he was satisfied like Indra, experiencing the pleasures of the world, born from the proximity of the objects of the senses. ||5||

One day, he went to the presence of the Self-Luminous Jina. There, he praised him with humility and listened to the pure teachings of Dharma. ||6||

He then began to contemplate: "The union of beings with their bodies and of the senses with their objects is impermanent, because in this world, the soul and body of all beings, and the senses and their objects, are constantly subject to the absence of one or the other." ||7||

"Even if the followers of other religions are deluded, I have taken refuge in the lotus feet of the Arhant, who destroys the power of the enemy of delusion. How can I make my mind steady in these matters? How can I consider these things as permanent?" Thus, his mind, breaking free from the great knot of delusion, began to strive. ||8-9||

Then, like a deer terrified by the flames of a forest fire, he decided to abandon his long-held abode, the world. ||10||

He entrusted the kingdom to his son, Ghana-ratha, and embraced the path of restraint. He became a Tīrthankara, crossing the ocean of eleven Angas. ||11||

Finally, he embraced Sallekhana, relinquished his body, and attained the position of Indra in the Pushpottara Vimana of the Achyuta heaven. ||12||

His lifespan was twenty-two Sagaras, his body was three and a half hands tall, he had a white complexion, and he lived for eleven months. ||13||

May the Jina, who destroys infinite vices and is the mine of infinite virtues, reside in our hearts and destroy the lineage of internal darkness. ||Sha ||

Page #150:
---------------------------
122
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, states that the Khatrayana sect consumed Varaha meat. He was happy due to mental contemplation and his knowledge extended to the sixth earth, Tamas Prabha.  His strength, activity, and brilliance also extended to that earth. After enjoying happiness for a long time, he became ready to come to this middle world. ||15||

In the southern part of this Jambudvipa, in the city of Ayodhya, the great king Singhasena, a descendant of Ikshvaku and belonging to the Kashyapa gotra, ruled. ||16|| His queen was named Jayashyama. The gods showered the best nectar on her house for six months. ||17||

On the first day of the dark fortnight of Kartik, in the morning, in the Revati constellation, he saw an elephant entering his mouth after seeing sixteen dreams. ||18|| The king, who had the knowledge of the future, understood the meaning of those dreams. At that time, Achyutendra entered her womb, and she was filled with great joy. ||19||

Then the gods performed the auspicious ceremony of the descent to heaven and worshipped King Singhasena and Queen Jayashyama with clothes, garlands, and large ornaments. ||20|| Jayashyama's womb grew happily. After nine months, on the twelfth day of the dark fortnight of Jyestha, in the Pushya yoga, she gave birth to a virtuous son. ||21||

At that time, Indra came and performed the coronation of that son on Mount Meru and, with great joy, named him Anantjit, a meaningful name. ||22||

After the time of Sri Vimalnath Bhagwan, nine oceans and one and a half Palyas had passed, and when the Dharma was about to end, Bhagwan Anant Jinendra was born. His lifespan was included in this interval. ||23||

His lifespan was three lakh years, his body was fifty dhanus high, his color was like shining gold, and he possessed all the auspicious signs. ||24||

Bhagwan Anantnath, who was worshipped by humans, Vidyadharas, and gods, received his coronation after seven lakh fifty thousand years had passed. ||25||

After fifteen lakh years of his reign, one day, he saw a meteor shower and attained true knowledge. ||26||

He thought, "This vine of evil deeds has originated from the seed of ignorance, is supported by the earth of unrestraint, is watered by the water of carelessness, and its trunk is made of the kshaya, a thick branch. It has grown due to the support of yoga, and it has been separated by the movement of the Tiryanch. It is covered with the flower of old age, and it is like a badam tree. ||27||

Page #151:
---------------------------
## The Sixtieth Chapter

The creeper of evil karma, laden with the bitter fruits of sorrow, is bent low.  I, desiring self-realization, will cut it at the root with the sword of pure meditation. || 29 ||

Approached by the worldly gods, who praised him, the victorious one, having established his kingdom under the rule of Anantavijaya, was worshipped. || 30 ||

Having received the third auspicious ceremony from the gods, he mounted the palanquin named Sagardatta and went to the Sahetuka forest. || 31 ||

On the twelfth day of the dark fortnight of Jyestha, during the sixth fast, in the constellation Revati, he was initiated by a thousand kings in the afternoon. || 32 ||

Having attained the knowledge of the end, and possessing the restraint of Samayika, he went to Saketa on the second day for his journey. || 33 ||

Visakha, the king, gave him food, and being like gold in radiance, he received the five wonders, the knowledge of heaven and liberation. || 34 ||

After two years of penance in the aforementioned forest, in the state of concealment, he attained Kevala Jnana at the foot of the Asvattha tree, on the last day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra, in the constellation Revati, in the evening. || 35 ||

At that very time, the supreme gods performed the fourth auspicious ceremony. || 36 ||

His divine voice, resonating with the fifty virtues of the chief, Jaya, was worthy of being worshipped by a thousand former holders of the office, and was saluted by two thousand two hundred monks. || 37 ||

He was the teacher, marked by the number of the senses and the openings of the senses, and was worshipped by the third knowledge, which is spoken of as two zeros and three times. || 38 ||

He was endowed with the knowledge of Kevala, which is spoken of as three zeros and the senses, and was adorned by the eight powers, which are spoken of as three zeros. || 39 ||

He was the teacher of the knowledge of the mind and its transformations, which is spoken of as three zeros and the senses, and was revered by sixty-six thousand monks, who are spoken of as being in a state of concentration. || 40 ||

He was accompanied by a group of one hundred and eight thousand Aryikas, who are spoken of as being the followers of all the scriptures, and was worshipped by two hundred thousand Shravakas and praised by four hundred thousand Shravikas. || 41 ||

He was praised by countless gods and goddesses, and served by countless Tiryanchas. Thus, he was the leader of the group of the glorious, who were present in the twelve assemblies. || 42 ||

Revealing the nature of existence and non-existence, the victorious Anantajit, having wandered through famous lands, guided the worthy beings on the path. || 43 ||

Finally, reaching the summit of Sammed Shikhar, he stayed there for six hundred months, along with a thousand monks. || 44 ||

Page #152:
---------------------------
124
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, the one who held the image yoga, attained the supreme state by the fourth stage of meditation yoga on the night before the full moon of the month of Chaitra. ||15|| Even the group of gods, with great respect, performed the final rites for him, and having done so according to the rules, they all went to their respective heavens. ||16||
May the sun, the Lord Anantajit, who has illuminated the entire world with the rays of right faith, which are like the sun, from the dense darkness of wrong faith, who is hated by the owls of wrong doctrines, whose excellent brilliance is extremely radiant, and who causes the lotus of the noble beings to bloom, burn away your sins. ||17||
He who was previously the famous king named Padmaratha, then became Achyutendra, the holder of unshakeable intellect, due to the influence of penance, and then from there, becoming the Jina named Anantajit, the conqueror of death, may he protect you all from death in countless births. ||48||
Now, I will tell you the excellent character of these two in their three births, for at the time of this Anantanatha, there were also the Narayanas named Suprabha Balabhadra and Purushottama. ||49||
In this Bharatavarsha, in the city of Podanapura, there lived King Vasushena, whose queen was Nanda, who was highly praiseworthy. ||50||
Although the king had five hundred wives, he loved Nanda above all, just as a bee, even though there are many flowers in the spring season, is more attracted to the mango blossom. ||51||
The king of the Malaya country, Chandrasasana, was a friend of King Vasushena, so he came to Podanapura to see him sometime. ||52||
Driven by the rise of sin, Chandrasasana was captivated by the sight of Nanda, so he, with his evil mind, devised a way to abduct her and take her to his own country. ||53||
King Vasushena was powerless, so he was very distressed by this defeat, and his life was being taken away by the Yama of worry, but by the strength of memory, 
१  The group of gods, who are said to sit in heaven, are the group of gods. २  The sun of the Jinas. ३  That is, क०, घ०. ४  On the earth, ल०, ख०.

Page #153:
---------------------------
The Sixty-First Chapter

Having attained the Shreyogana-Dhara, he took the vows of Pravrajya. Being very strong, he performed austerities like the Lion-Play, etc. || 55 || If there is any fruit of this practice of mine, then in another birth I will be a king whose commands are not disobeyed. || 56 || Then, having taken the vows of renunciation, he went to the Sahasrar, the twelfth heaven. His lifespan there was eighteen oceans. || 57 || 

Then, in the Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, there was a prosperous city called Nandana. In that city, a powerful king named Mahabala ruled. He was a protector of his people, a enjoyer of pleasures, very righteous, glorious, his fame extended to the ends of the directions, and he was a remover of the suffering of the needy. || 58-59 || 

One day, he attained the knowledge of the true nature of the body and other things, and became detached from them, eager to attain Nirvana. || 60 || He gave his kingdom to his son and, taking the vows of renunciation, he went to the Arhant named Dantika and performed the Lion-Play austerity. || 61 || 

Finally, having taken the vows of renunciation, he was born in the Sahasrar heaven, which has a lifespan of eighteen oceans. There, he enjoyed pleasures for a long time. When his final time came, he died with a peaceful mind. || 62 || 

And in this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat region, in the city of Dwaravati, the son of King Soma-Prabha, named Su-Prabha, was born to Queen Jayavanti. || 63 || 

That Su-Prabha was adorned like another Vijaya-ardha, because just as the great Yati Vijaya is very tall, so too was Su-Prabha endowed with a great future; just as Vijaya is very high, so too was Su-Prabha of a noble nature; just as Vijaya is the refuge of gods and Vidyadharas, so too was Su-Prabha the protector of gods and Vidyadharas; and just as Vijaya wears the white color, so too did Su-Prabha wear the white color, or the whiteness of fame. || 64 || 

Not only that, but Su-Prabha also defeated the moon, because the moon is marked with spots, but Su-Prabha was spotless; the moon is beautiful only at night, but Su-Prabha was always beautiful, day and night; the moon does not captivate everyone's hearts, it is not dear to the swans, etc., but Su-Prabha captivated everyone's hearts, he was beloved by all; and the moon does not cause the lotus to bloom, but Su-Prabha caused the lotus to bloom, he was the bringer of joy to Lakshmi. || 65 || 

To that same king's queen, Sita, was born a son named Vasushena, who was a perfect man. || 66 ||

Page #154:
---------------------------
126
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, is served by all the Tejasvis (radiant ones) and is a great elevation that cannot be surpassed. It is beautiful like Sumeru, adorned with great jewels. ||6||
Balabhadra and Narayana, the embodiments of white and black brilliance, were the initiators of all worldly affairs. They were like the two fortnights, shining together. ||68||
Their bodies were fifty dhanus (a unit of measurement) tall, their lifespan was thirty lakhs years, and they enjoyed equal happiness. They lived for a long time, enjoying equal happiness. ||69||
Then, after many births, the fierce ruler of the past, Chandashasana, became Chand, like the fierce sun, punishing the armies of his enemies. ||70||
In Kashi, the king of the city of Varanasi, Madhusudana, was known for his strength and valor. ||71||
Hearing of their glory, the intolerant Madhusudana sent a message to Narada, saying, "Send me elephants, jewels, and other gifts." ||72||
Hearing this, the ocean of Purushottama's mind was agitated like the wind at the end of a Yuga. He became as terrible as Yama, the god of death, and was filled with anger. ||73||
Balabhadra, the radiant one, spread the brilliance of his eyes in all directions, like a blazing fire of anger. ||74||
He said, "I don't know what a 'kar' is. Is it a hand? What is it used for? I will give him a hand with a shining sword. Let him accept it with his head." ||75||
"Let him come and take it. What harm is there?" Thus, the two brothers, radiating brilliance, replied to Narada in harsh words. ||76||
Hearing this, Madhusudana became enraged and went to kill them. The two brothers, filled with anger, also went to kill him. ||77||
The two armies clashed, as if to destroy everything. The enemy, Madhusudana, hurled his discus at Purushottama, but it could not harm him. Finally, Purushottama used the same discus to kill Madhusudana.

Page #155:
---------------------------
The Sixtieth Chapter
127
The two brothers, Balabhadra and Narayana, became the rulers of the three divisions and experienced the sovereignty of the three divisions, just as the Sun and Moon experience the sovereignty of the celestial sphere. || 79 ||
At the end of his life, Narayana, the sixth, went to the sixth hell, and Balabhadra, the elder brother, was consumed by the fire of grief arising from his separation. || 80 ||
He was enlightened by the Jina, Soma Prabha, and with a joyful heart, he took initiation and finally ascended the क्षपक श्रेणी and attained liberation. || 81 ||
Narayana, the sixth, was born as King Vasushena in the city of Podanapura, then he performed austerities and became a god, the holder of the शुक्ललेश्या, then he was born as the ruler of the half-Bharata region, a destroyer of enemies, and was known as Narayana, the sixth, and then he was born in the seventh earth in the lower world. || 82 ||
The king, Chandrasasana, the wicked ruler of the Malaya region, wandered in delusion for a long time and became Madhusudana, and then he was submerged in the lower part of the ocean of existence. || 83 ||
Balabhadra was born as King Mahabhala in the city of Nandana, then he performed great austerities and became a god in the twelfth heaven, then he was born as Balabhadra, known as Su-Prabha, and he renounced all attachments and attained the supreme abode. || 84 ||
See, Su-Prabha and Narayana, the sixth, enjoyed the best pleasures of the kingdom together, but the first, Su-Prabha, attained liberation, and the second, Narayana, the sixth, went to hell. This is all due to the diversity of their actions and tendencies. || 85 ||
Thus ends the sixtieth chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which describes the Puranas of Anantanatha Tirthankara, Su-Prabha Balabhadra, Narayana, the sixth, and Madhusudana.
1. Chandra-Surya. 2. Mayusha. 3. Nripatim.

Page #156:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-First Chapter

Where ten pure Dharmas arise, that Dharma grants me peace, destroying our Adharma. ||1||

In the eastern part of the Dhaataki-khand, on the banks of the river in the eastern Videha, in the southern Vatsa country, there is a great city called Suseema. ||2||

King Dasharatha ruled there, endowed with wisdom, valor, and fortune. He was the master of his enemies, free from worldly pursuits, and lived in peace. ||3||

He was always eager to protect his subjects and enjoyed the happiness of Dharma, along with his relatives and friends. ||4||

On the full moon day of Madhava (Vaisakha), during a festival, a lunar eclipse occurred. Seeing this, King Dasharatha's mind became immediately saddened. ||5||

"This moon is beautiful, delighting the lotus flowers (the celestial sphere), and is full of arts. If even it has reached this state, what is the state of other men?" ||6||

Thinking thus, he entrusted the kingdom to his son, Maharatha, and embraced non-attachment, becoming light and accepting restraint. ||7||

He was a follower of the eleven Angas, contemplated the sixteen causes of existence, bound himself to the merit of the Tirthankaras, and purified his intellect at the end of his life. ||8||

He was the lord of all, with thirty-three oceans as his domain, his body a cubit high, and he breathed once every four hundred and ninety days, or sixteen and a half months. ||9||

His pure knowledge of the Avadhi extended to the end of the Lokanali, and he was endowed with the power of action, brilliance, and strength that extended as far. ||10||

He gathered his mental food once every thirty thousand years, and was adorned with both the material and spiritual white leśyā. ||11||

Thus, he experienced the supreme happiness of all-encompassing attainment, free from doubt. He was ready to be reborn in the human realm, being a worthy recipient of merit. ||12||

On this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called Ratnapur. In that city, King Bhanu, a descendant of the Kuru dynasty, of the Kashyapa gotra, was a great hero, endowed with immense wealth and fortune. His queen was named Suprabha, and the gods honored her with showers of jewels and other riches. ||13||

May the Jina Dharmanatha Bhagavan, with his utmost purity, supreme forbearance, and the ten Dharmas, destroy our Adharma and grant us peace. ||1||

Page #157:
---------------------------
The Sixty-First Chapter
126
On the thirteenth day of the waning moon in the month of Vaisakha, in the Revati constellation, at the end of the night, sixteen dreams appeared to Shobha. || 15 || Waking up, she inquired about the meaning of the dreams from her husband, the knower of the future, and was filled with joy as if she had given birth to a son. || 16 || At that time, the Lord, the Supreme, descended into her womb from the last Anuttara Vimāna, the abode of all-fulfillment. The Indras came together and performed the ceremony of Garbha Kalyāṇaka. || 17 || After nine months, on the thirteenth day of the waxing moon in the month of Magha, in the Guru Yoga, she gave birth to the knower of the future, the one with eyes like lotus petals. || 18 || At that time, the Lord of the gods, taking him to the Mount Meru, anointed him with the water of the ocean of milk, filled in large golden pots, adorned him with ornaments, and named him Dharma, with great joy. || 19 || In the lineage of Ananta Jin, after the passage of time equivalent to four oceans, when half of the final pralaya had passed, and the world was devoid of Dharma, Dharma Nath was born. His lifespan was also within this interval. His lifespan was ten lakh years, his body had the radiance of gold, and his height was one hundred and eighty hands. When two and a half lakh years of his childhood had passed, he attained the kingdom. || 20-23 || He was very tall, very pure, beautiful to behold, a great refuge, and the nourisher of all beings, therefore, he was like the cloud of the rainy season. || 24 || Or, he was like a great elephant, because just as a great elephant is of a noble lineage, so was he of a noble nature. Just as a great elephant is endowed with great generosity and pride, so was he endowed with great generosity and pride. Just as a great elephant is endowed with good features and auspicious signs, so was he endowed with good features and auspicious signs. Just as a great elephant is great, so was he great and superior. Just as a great elephant has a good trunk, so did he have good hands. And just as a great elephant has a good voice, so did he have a good, sweet voice. || 25 || He punished the wicked and protected the righteous, not out of hatred or desire, but because of the nature of their actions. Therefore, even when he punished, he was revered by the people. || 26 || If his fame, which spread throughout the world, was not a creeper, then why is it still growing today, nourished by the rain of the words of the poets? || 27 || The earth, adorned with his virtues, was fit for enjoyment and pleasure for him. She was like a beloved wife, fulfilling all his desires and bringing him desired results. || 28 ||

Page #158:
---------------------------
130
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, they will obtain liberation from the bondage of karma through this Dharma. What can be said about their happiness, which is like a spotless jewel? || 29 || In the past, when the reign of the king lasted for five hundred thousand years, one day, seeing a meteor shower, he became detached.  He thought, "How, where, and from whom did this body of mine originate? What is its essence? Whose vessel is it? What will become of this body?"  Without pondering these questions, I, a fool, have been in the company of this body for a long time.  By accumulating sin, I have been suffering its consequences.  Driven by karma, I, a fool, have considered suffering as happiness and have never attained eternal happiness.  I have been wandering through countless births in vain, exhausted.  These qualities of knowledge, vision, etc., are mine, I never even imagined that, but contrary to this, due to the perversity of my mind, I considered attachment, etc., as my qualities.  Entangled by the clutches of affection and delusion, this being repeatedly nourishes his family and wealth, accumulating sin and wandering through various hells.  Thus, knowing him to be the Buddha himself, the celestial beings of the world came and praised him with great devotion, saying, "O God, you have fulfilled your purpose today." || 30-36 || He gave the kingdom to his eldest son, Sudharma, and received the celebration of the coronation ceremony at the time of his initiation.  He boarded a palanquin called Nagadatta, and along with the supreme gods, went to the garden of the Sal forest and observed a two-day fast.  On the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, in the evening, with a thousand kings, he took the initiation for liberation in the Pushya constellation. || 37-38 || As soon as he took initiation, he attained the knowledge of mind-perception.  On the second day, he went to the city of Pataliputra, adorned with flags, to eat. || 40 || There, the king Dhanyasena, who shone like gold, gave him a gift, a treasure, to this worthy recipient, and received five wonders. || 41 || After that, a year passed in the state of concealment.  He performed a two-day fast under the Saptachhada tree in the same ancient forest, and on the full moon day of Pausha, in the evening, in the Pushya constellation, he attained Kevala Jnana.  He received the worship of the virtuous, which is a sign of the fourth auspiciousness. || 42-43 || 
The heroine was willing to give the fruit according to his wishes. || 28 || 
When other noble beings, through the influence of these Dharma Nath Bhagwan, destroy their enemies in the form of karma and attain pure happiness, how can their happiness be described? || 26 ||

Page #159:
---------------------------
The Sixty-First Festival
131
The Lord of the forty-three Ganadharas, beginning with Arishtasen, was surrounded by nine hundred and eleven previous Dharmas, was adorned with forty thousand seven hundred teachers, was endowed with three thousand six hundred and three types of Avadhi-knowledge, was accompanied by four thousand five hundred Kevala-knowers, was embellished by seven thousand Vikriya-riddhi-holders, was surrounded by four thousand five hundred Manahparyaya-knowers, was worshipped by a group of two thousand eight hundred Vadi-s, and was accompanied by sixty-four thousand Munis, and was worshipped by sixty-two thousand four hundred Aryikas, beginning with Suvrata. He was accompanied by two hundred thousand Shravakas, was surrounded by four hundred thousand Shravikas, and was served by countless Devas and Devis and innumerable Tiryanchas. ||44-46|| Thus, endowed with the wealth of twelve assemblies and adorned with the banner of Dharma, the Lord preached Dharma. ||50|| At the end of the Vihara, he went to the mountain king Sammed Shikhar and, with eight hundred and nine Munis, entered into a one-month Yoga Nirodha. And on the fourth day of the bright half of Jyeshtha, at the end of the night, he completed the Sukla-dhyana called Sukshmakriya-pratipati and Vyuparatakriya-nivarti, and attained Moksha-Lakshmi in the Pushya Nakshatra. ||51-52|| At that time, Devas came from all directions and celebrated the Nirvana Kalyanak and worshipped him. ||53||
May the Dharma-nath, who in a previous birth was King Dasharatha, who conquered his enemies, who then attained the state of Ahmin-dratva, and whose ten Dharmas, when spoken, act like ten chariots in fighting against evil, protect you all. ||54||
May the Dharma-nath Jinen-dra, who has destroyed all harmful karmas, whose Kevala-knowledge is completely unshakeable, who has expounded the supreme Dharma, who is completely pure due to the destruction of the three bodies, who is himself endowed with infinite happiness, and who has pacified all souls, grant you all infinite happiness. ||55||
1 Vivatalo. 2 Samanvitaha la. 3-Tubbyante la. 4 Vinasha ka...

Page #160:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

132
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that the glorious Sudarshan was born as a Bazha. He was Keshava, the lion-like, the strong, and the leader of the assembly. || 5 || 
I will now narrate the story of his three births. In the city of Rajagriha, there was a proud king named Sumitra. || 57 || 
He was a great wrestler and had defeated many, earning the respect of the judges. He considered others as insignificant as grass and was arrogant like a wild elephant. || 58 || 
One day, a king named Rajasimha, who was also a great wrestler and full of pride, came to Rajagriha to subdue his arrogance. || 59 || 
Sumitra was defeated by Rajasimha in a long battle and was left heartbroken, like an elephant with its tusks broken. || 60 || 
His pride shattered, Sumitra was unable to bear the burden of the kingdom. He appointed his son as the king, for pride is the life of the proud. || 61 || 
Filled with dispassion, Sumitra went to Krishnacharya and was initiated into the Dharma after listening to his teachings. This is fitting for the wise. || 62 || 
He performed severe austerities, including the Lion-Play, but the pain of his defeat remained in his heart. Finally, he thought, "If the fruit of my austerities is to be obtained in another birth, then may I gain such strength and power that I can conquer my enemies." || 63-64 || 
With this resolve, he renounced the world and died, becoming a god in the Maheindra heaven, residing in the realm of seven oceans. He enjoyed the pleasures of heaven for a long time. || 65 || 
After that, in this Jambudvipa, in the city of Vitashoka-puri, located east of Mount Meru, there was a king named Naravrishabha, a powerful and prosperous ruler. He ruled a kingdom free from internal and external strife, enjoyed great happiness, and finally renounced his kingdom, becoming a Digambara monk under the guidance of Damvara Muni. || 66-67 || 
He spent his long life in severe austerities and became a god in the Sahasrar heaven, residing in the realm of eighteen oceans. || 68 || 
By constantly seeing his beloved celestial wives, he attained the fruit of his unwavering eyes. || 19 || 
In this city of Khagapura, the king Singhasena, a descendant of Ikshvaku, had a son named Sudarshan. || 7 || 
After this, in the same Tirtha where the Dharma-nath Bhagavan was, there was a powerful Balabhadra named Sudarshan and a strong man named Narayana, the lion of the assembly. || 56 || 
Therefore, I will now narrate the story of their three births. In the city of Rajagriha, there was a proud king named Sumitra. He was a great wrestler and had defeated many, earning the respect of the judges. He considered others as insignificant as grass and was arrogant like a wild elephant. || 57-58 || 
One day, a king named Rajasimha, who was also a great wrestler and full of pride, came to Rajagriha to subdue his arrogance. || 59 || 
He defeated Sumitra in a long battle and left him heartbroken, like an elephant with its tusks broken. || 60 || 
His pride shattered, Sumitra was unable to bear the burden of the kingdom. He appointed his son as the king, for pride is the life of the proud. || 61 || 
Filled with dispassion, Sumitra went to Krishnacharya and was initiated into the Dharma after listening to his teachings. This is fitting for the wise. || 62 || 
He performed severe austerities, including the Lion-Play, but the pain of his defeat remained in his heart. Finally, he thought, "If the fruit of my austerities is to be obtained in another birth, then may I gain such strength and power that I can conquer my enemies." || 63-64 || 
With this resolve, he renounced the world and died, becoming a god in the Maheindra heaven, residing in the realm of seven oceans. He enjoyed the pleasures of heaven for a long time. || 65 || 
After that, in this Jambudvipa, in the city of Vitashoka-puri, located east of Mount Meru, there was a king named Naravrishabha, a powerful and prosperous ruler. He ruled a kingdom free from internal and external strife, enjoyed great happiness, and finally renounced his kingdom, becoming a Digambara monk under the guidance of Damvara Muni. || 66-67 || 
He spent his long life in severe austerities and became a god in the Sahasrar heaven, residing in the realm of eighteen oceans. || 68 || 
By constantly seeing his beloved celestial wives, he attained the fruit of his unwavering eyes. || 19 || 
In this city of Khagapura, the king Singhasena, a descendant of Ikshvaku, had a son named Sudarshan. || 7 ||

Page #161:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-First Chapter

133

Sumitra, son of Ambika, was Keshava. They were both fifty-five dhanus tall and had a lifespan of ten lakh years. || 1 ||

They were endowed with intellect, form, and strength, and were mutually supportive. They conquered all their enemies and delighted their own people with their virtues. || 72 ||

Though their Lakshmi was undivided, it did not cause any fault for them. For those with pure minds, everything is pure. || 73 ||

Now, in the Kurujangala region of the Bharata Kshetra, there was a city called Hastinapur, ruled by King Madhukrida. He was the reincarnation of Rajasinha, who had conquered Sumitra. He had defeated all his enemies, but he could not tolerate the rising power of Balabhadra and Narayana. So, this powerful king sent his chief minister, Dandagarbha, to demand many precious jewels as tribute. || 74-76 ||

Just as lions become enraged at the sound of an elephant's roar, so too did the two brothers, radiant like the sun, become enraged at the words of the chief minister. || 77 ||

They said, "This fool demands a snake-infested treasury for his amusement. If he comes near, he will surely receive this tribute." || 78 ||

Thus, the two brothers spoke harshly in anger. The minister quickly went and informed King Madhukrida. || 79 ||

Hearing their insults, King Madhukrida, his body flushed with anger, gathered a large army and set out to fight them. || 80 ||

Narayana, skilled in warfare, went to meet him, attacked him, and fought him for a long time. Finally, he swiftly severed his head with the very chakra that Madhukrida had thrown. || 81 ||

The two brothers became rulers of the three continents and enjoyed the wealth of the kingdom. At the end of his lifespan, Narayana went to the seventh hell. || 82 ||

Balabhadra, grieving for his brother, took refuge in the Tirthankara and received initiation. He destroyed his sins and attained the supreme state. || 83 ||

**Malini**

The two brothers, with their armies defeated, were proud and powerful. They were the fruits of good deeds, rulers of the three continents. And finally, with a peaceful mind, a son named Sudarshan was born to King Singhasena, of the Ikshvaku dynasty, in the city of Khagapura, on this Jambudvipa, from his victorious queen Vijaya. || 69-70 ||

Sumitra, the son of Ambika, the other queen of this king, was the reincarnation of Narayana. Both brothers were fifty-five dhanus tall and had a lifespan of ten lakh years. || 71 ||

They were endowed with intellect, form, and strength, and were mutually supportive. They conquered all their enemies and delighted their own people with their virtues. || 72 ||

Though their Lakshmi was undivided, it did not cause any fault for them. For those with pure minds, everything is pure. || 73 ||

1. Vijaya L. 12 Samudyoti Kha.

Page #162:
---------------------------
134
The Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, behold how these two brothers, who were destroyers of enemy armies, proud, valiant, enjoyers of the fruits of merit, and masters of three realms, were separated by evil karma. Alas for the subjugation to evil due to the delusion of Keshava! 84
Purusha Simha Narayana, first in the famous Rajagriha city, was a king named Sumitra, then he became a deva in the Maendra heaven, from there he fell and became a Narayana named Purusha Simha in this Khagapura city, and after that he became a Naraki in the terrible seventh hell. 85
Pratinarayana, first a king named Rajasimha, who subdued the proud elephants, then wandered astray in the forest of the world for a long time, then he took refuge in the path of Dharma and became Madhukrida in the city of Hastinapur, and after that he attained misery. 86
Sudarshan Balabhadra, first a king named Naravrishabha in the famous Pitashoka city, then he performed severe penance for a long time and became a deva in the Sahasrar heaven, then he fell from there and became Balabhadra in the Khagapura city, who destroyed the side of his enemies, and then, being the abode of forgiveness, he became immortal and attained the happiness of Kshayika. 87
In the same Dharma Nath Tirthankara's tirtha, the third Maghava Chakravarti became, therefore I tell his Purana from the third bhava. 88
In the tirtha of Shri Vasupujya Tirthankara, there was a great king named Narapati, he enjoyed the pleasures obtained by good fortune, became detached, and died after performing excellent penance. Finally, due to good fortune, he became Ahminndra in the middle Praveyak. 89-90
He enjoyed the beautiful divine pleasures for twenty-seven sagaras, then he fell from there and in the interval of Dharma Nath Tirthankara, in the beautiful Kosala province, he became the son of the king of Saketa city, the son of Ikshvaku, Sumitra, and Bhadra. 91-92
The virtuous Maghava, the future king of the Bharatas, with a lifespan of five hundred thousand years, devoted to the welfare of all. 93
1. One whose breath is gone, whose birth is gone.

Page #163:
---------------------------
## Translation:

135
The sixty-first Tirthankara, **Maghva**, was forty-four **dhanush** tall, with a body radiant like gold. He was a powerful protector of the earth, adorned with six continents.  || 14 || He was adorned with fourteen **maha-ratnas** and was the lord of nine treasures. He bowed the heads of humans, **vidyadharas**, and **Indras** at his feet. || 95 || He enjoyed ten types of pleasures, as described in the scriptures, with ninety-six thousand **devis**, fulfilling his desires. || 16 || One day, while resting in the beautiful garden called **Manohar**, he saw the **kevala** light of **Abhayghosh**. || 17 || He circumambulated him thrice, offered salutations, listened to the teachings of **dharma**, and understood the truth of **tattva**. He renounced worldly attachments and gave his kingdom to his beloved son, **Priyamitra**. || 18 || He renounced all external and internal attachments and embraced **samyama**. || 99 || He possessed pure faith, **samyak-darshan**, and **acharitra**, and was endowed with the wealth of scriptures. He destroyed the three **ghatis** (knowledge-veil, vision-veil, and **antaraya**) through the second **shukla-dhyana**. || 10 || He became the lord of nine **kevala-labdhis** and preached **dharma** like a **dharmanatha**. He guided many beings towards the supreme **nirvana**. || 101 || He destroyed the four **aghatis** through the third and fourth stages of **shukla-dhyana**. He attained **moksha**, free from the bondage of **karma**. || 102 ||

The third **chakravarti**, **Maghva**, was previously a king named **Narapati** in the **tirtha** of **Vasupujya**. He then became **Ahamindra**, a great king with a peaceful and virtuous character. He was followed by **Maghva**, the third **chakravarti**, who possessed all virtues and later attained the supreme bliss of **moksha**. || 103 ||

After **Maghva**, the **chakravarti**, **Sanatkumar**, the son of **Anantvirya**, the king of **Ayodhya** and the crown jewel of the **Surya** dynasty, was born to his queen **Sahadevi**. He was born in the sixteenth **swarg** and was the beloved of the **chakravarti's** fortune. || 104-105 || His lifespan was three lakh years, and...

Page #164:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

136
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, his senses were satiated by the tenfold enjoyments and the union of enjoyments. He was like a great Kalpa tree, fulfilling the desires of those who sought his help. || 107 || He ruled over the entire earth, from the Himalayas to the southern ocean, and enjoyed immense wealth. || 108 || 

While they were enjoying themselves, the Devas in the assembly of Sudharma Indra asked him, "Is there anyone in this world who can conquer the form of Sanatkumar Indra?" Sudharma Indra replied, "Yes, Sanatkumar Chakravarti is the most beautiful of all. No one has ever seen a man like him, even in their dreams." Hearing this, two Devas were filled with curiosity and came to earth to see him. When they saw Sanatkumar Chakravarti, they exclaimed, "Sudharma Indra was right!" and were overjoyed. || 109-112 ||

They explained the reason for their arrival to Sanatkumar Chakravarti and said, "O wise Chakravarti! Listen with an attentive mind. If you were free from the possibility of disease, old age, sorrow, and death in this world, then you could conquer even the Tirthankaras with your beauty." || 113-114 ||

Saying this, the two Devas quickly returned to their own abode. King Sanatkumar was enlightened by their words, as if time itself had come to enlighten him. || 115 ||

He began to think, "The beauty, youth, wealth, and happiness of humans are like the tendrils of a lightning vine, which perish quickly." || 116 ||

"I will abandon these fleeting possessions and become a conqueror of sins. I will quickly shed this body and attain the state of being without a body." || 117 ||

Thinking this, he entrusted his kingdom to his son, Devakumar, and took initiation along with many kings near Shivgupt Jinendra. || 118 ||

He was worthy of worship due to the five great vows of non-violence, etc. He followed the five principles of conduct, etc. He controlled himself with the six essentials, restrained his senses, renounced clothing, slept on the ground, and never brushed his teeth. He ate only once a day, standing up. He was adorned with the twenty-eight fundamental virtues. || 119-120 ||

His height was forty-five dhanus, the same as the height of the previous Chakravarti. He had a complexion like gold and ruled over the entire earth. || 106 ||

Page #165:
---------------------------
Sixty-first Chapter

He practiced the virtues mentioned in the scriptures, such as practicing Trikala Yoga, sitting in Viraasana and other postures, and sleeping on one side. ||121|| He was tolerant like the earth, he removed the suffering of those who sought refuge in him like water, he was unshakable like a mountain, he was detached like an atom, he was pure like the sky, he was deep like the ocean, he delighted everyone like the moon, he was radiant like the sun, he was pure inside and out like refined gold, he was impartial like a mirror, he was withdrawn like a tortoise, he did not make a permanent abode anywhere like a snake, he moved silently like an elephant, he looked ahead like a jackal, he was a valiant warrior like a lion, and he was always alert like a deer. He had conquered all obstacles, endured all hardships, and attained many powers like reaction, etc. ||122-126|| He ascended the ladder of क्षपक and, through the two शुक्लध्यान, destroyed the karmas of violence and attained Kevala Jnana. ||127|| After that, he wandered through many countries, preached the right Dharma to many noble beings, and showed the right path to liberation, which is difficult to attain, to those who were on the wrong path. ||128|| When his lifespan was reduced to a moment, he stopped the three Yogas and attained the imperishable state of liberation, which is obtained by the destruction of all karmas. ||129|| May Lord Sanatkumara, who conquered Indra, who is like a Jina, with his body, who attacked the group of directions with his valor, and who destroyed the group of sins with the Dharmachakra, grant you prosperity soon. ||130|| Thus ends the sixty-first chapter of the Trishatika Lakshana Mahapurana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which narrates the Puranas of Tirthankara, Sudarsana, Balabhadra, Purushasimha Narayana, Madhukrida Pratinarayana, Maghava, and Sanatkumara Chakravarti.

Page #166:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Chapter

Wednesday, the day of Mercury, is the destroyer of all knowledge due to its inherent nature.  May peace be upon you, for whom the knowledge is complete and restful. ||1||

The wise one, having described the differences between the speaker, the listener, and the story, will then speak of the Dharma-katha, filled with profound meaning and true to reality. ||2||

Being learned, having a noble character, being compassionate, being intelligent, being eloquent, understanding gestures, being tolerant of questions and objections, having a pleasant face, knowing the ways of the world, being renowned and worshipped, and being concise in speech - these are the qualities of a Dharma-upadeshta (teacher of Dharma). ||3-4||

If the speaker, though knowing the truths, lacks character, then people will think, "Why doesn't he practice what he preaches?" and will not accept his words. ||5||

If the speaker, though having a noble character, lacks knowledge of the scriptures, he will be mocked by those who are arrogant with their little knowledge, and will make the path of liberation seem like a joke. ||6||

Just as knowledge and vision are the unhindered nature of the soul, so too, learning and noble character are the main characteristics of a speaker. ||7||

He should be able to ponder, "Is this right or wrong?" He should be able to point out the faults of inappropriate actions, and accept good advice with devotion. He should not be overly attached to previous, meaningless teachings, nor should he be arrogant or laugh at mistakes. He should be devoted to his Guru, forgiving, fearful of the cycle of birth and death, and eager to hold onto the words spoken. Such a listener is said to possess the qualities of a parrot, a clay pot, or a swan. ||8-10||

Where the true nature of the soul, non-soul, and other substances is explained clearly, where those who wish well are made to renounce the body, the world, and enjoyments, where the special qualities of charity, worship, austerity, and conduct are described in detail, where bondage and liberation, and their causes and effects, are explained separately, where the concepts of existence and non-existence are explained logically, where compassion for all beings is described as a mother's love, and where listening brings about the ultimate good for all beings - that is the Dharma-katha. ||11-13||

May the knowledge of Jin Shantinath Bhagwan, who destroys the cycle of birth and death, be upon you all. He has attained complete rest, having known all substances, including their synonyms, and there is nothing left to know. ||1||

Page #167:
---------------------------
The sixty-second chapter, where the Angas attain liberation by renouncing all attachments, is called the Tattvadharmakatha. It is also known as Dharmakatha. - 14 -

Having thus described the characteristics of the speaker, the listener, and the Dharmakatha separately, I will now narrate the great story of Shanti Nath. - 15 -

Now, the lord of all islands, the king of Jambudvipa, whose vast garments are the blue waters of the salt ocean, has a most desirable region called Bharat, adorned with six divisions, situated between the salt ocean and the Himalayas, which bears the beauty of his face. - 16-17 -

There, in the land of enjoyment, are found the ten types of enjoyments of the Chakravartis, the wealth of the Tirthankaras, and the liberation attained by the destruction of the Aghatiya karmas. Therefore, wise people consider it superior even to the heaven. In that region, there is constant change due to increase and decrease, similar to the Airavata region. - 18-19 -

In the middle of it, there shines the Vijayardha mountain, which divides the Bharat region in half. It is long from east to west, high, and bright like a heap of glory. - 20 -

Or, that Vijayardha mountain, made of silver, seems like the accumulated laughter of the earth, a woman who has gained satisfaction from conquering the heavens. - 21 -

The rain that falls on us is always fruitful, but the rain that falls on you is never fruitful. Thus, that mountain, with its brilliance, seems to laugh at the Sumeru mountains. - 22 -

These rivers are fickle, crooked, rich in water (in the sense of being dense), and dear to the ocean (in the sense of being foolish). Therefore, with disgust, he vomited the Ganga and Sindhu, these two rivers, from his mouth, which is like a cave. - 23 -

That mountain imitated the Chakravarti, for just as the Chakravarti is always served by the gods and Vidyadharas who reside in his shelter and is the abode of all sensual pleasures, so too, that mountain was always served by the gods and Vidyadharas who resided in its shelter and was the abode of all sensual pleasures. - 24 -

In the southern range of that Vijayardha mountain, there is a city called Chakraval, which, with its flags, makes the sky seem as if it is filled with Balaakas. - 25 -

It is surrounded by a jeweled fort that kisses the clouds, so it seems as if it is the land of Jambudvipa, surrounded by a platform of jewels. - 26 -

There, the three aims of life, Dharma, Artha, and Kama, are flourishing with joy, and the word "poverty" is never heard, even from afar. - 27 -

Page #168:
---------------------------
140
The Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, is adorned with the four means of examination of objects, namely, Pramana, Nay, Nikshepa, and Anuyoga, which are difficult for others to understand. Just as a city is adorned with four gateways that are difficult for enemies to enter, so too this city was adorned with these four means. || 28 || Just as there are no words in the teachings of the Jina that preach about misconduct and lack of restraint, so too there were no women in this city who were devoid of the adornment of good character. || 29 || The king of this city was Jwalanajati, a skilled Vidyadhara, who was like a sea of gems, a repository of virtues. || 30 || Just as the sun's rays wither new leaves, so too his power withered his enemies, making them weak and pale. And just as rain nourishes vines, so too his policy made his people prosperous and flourishing. || 31 || Just as rice sown in the right place and at the right time yields excellent fruit, so too the strategies employed by him at the right time and in the right place yielded abundant results. || 32 || Just as a later number is greater than the previous ones, so too he surpassed all previous kings in his virtues and accomplishments, becoming great. || 33 || His achievements were dependent on both divine grace and his own efforts. He was free from anger towards both his own people and outsiders, and he carefully considered the affairs of his own kingdom and foreign lands. He was always blessed with harmony and prosperity due to the presence of the three powers - strength, magical power, and sovereign power - and the three achievements that arise from them. He also adhered to the six virtues - peace, war, travel, etc. - and therefore his kingdom continued to grow. || 34-35 ||
In the same victorious kingdom, there was another city called Dyutilak. King Chandraabha ruled there, and his queen's name was Subhadra. They had a daughter named Vayuvega. She had conquered all the swift Vidyadhara kings with her own speed-enhancing power. Her radiance was capable of outshining the brilliance of lightning. || 36-37 || Just as the intelligence of a fortunate and hardworking man leads to the attainment of the three goals of life, so too Vayuvega, adorned with all virtues, was the cause of Jwalanajati's attainment of the three goals. || 38 || She was praised by all people, like the line of the moon on the first day of the lunar month. And like the second layer of the earth, filled with love, she became worthy of being enjoyed by King Jwalanajati through her own efforts. || 39 || Vayuvega's love inspired Jwalanajati to create various kinds of ornaments. What is there that cannot be obtained through the power of love? || 40 ||

Page #169:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

The Sixty-Second Festival
Due to her noble birth and deep attachment, she became the sole wife of the king. People praised the king's monogamy due to his excessive love. What more needs to be said about her qualities of beauty and other virtues? His love for her was superhuman, like Indra's love for Indrani.

The son born to them, named Arkakeerti, illuminated the three worlds with the radiance of his own fame, just as the attainment of compassion and right knowledge leads to liberation. 

She was as enchanting as the goddess of fortune personified in the virtues of statesmanship and valor. She shone with her own brilliance, like the moon with the sun.

With her lotus-like face, lotus-like eyes, and the luster of her jeweled mirror, she outshone the moon with the splendor of her brows.

Her youthfulness blossomed in her like a creeper's flower, and she kindled the passion-fever in the hearts of the celestial lovers.

With her face glowing with a pale-golden hue, her restless eyes, and her slender waist, she appeared as if anxious about the breaking of her own charm.

Her delicate frame with a hue of emerald and her swelling, firm breasts seemed to be climbing up, as if eager to reach them.

Though untouched by Manmatha (Cupid), she manifested his emotions through the very bloom of her youth, captivating the hearts of people.

On another day, the two celestial bards named Jagannandana and Nabhimandana, endowed with mystic powers, took residence in the enchanting garden. Knowing this, the king, accompanied by his army, son, and the inner quarters, went there, paid obeisance, and listened to the exposition of the true Dharma. He then reverentially bowed to the celestial bards and returned to the city.

Even Svayamprabha joyfully accepted the true Dharma there. One day, during the festival, she worshipped the Arhats with a body weakened by fasting.

Page #170:
---------------------------
142
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the king, with devotion, took the garland, which was purified by the touch of the lotus feet of the Lord, and which was a remover of sins, and which was beautiful and variegated, and offered it to his father with humility, bowing his head and holding it with both hands. || 54 || 

The king, with devotion, took the garland and looked at Swayamprabha, who was exhausted from fasting, and said, "Go, break your fast." || 55 ||

When his daughter left, the king thought to himself, "This daughter of mine, who is beautiful in all her limbs, full of youth, to whom should I give her?" || 56 ||

He then summoned his council of ministers and told them what was in his mind. Having heard this, the wise minister Sushruta said, after examining the matter and deciding in his own mind, || 57 ||

"In the northern part of this victorious army, there is a king named Mayuragriva, who rules the city of Alka. His wife's name is Nilaanjana. They have five sons: Ashvagriva, Nilaratha, Nilakantha, Sukantha, and Vannakantha. Ashvagriva is the eldest." || 58-59 ||

"Ashvagriva's wife's name is Kanakachitra. They have five hundred sons: Ratnagriva, Ratnanga, Rajachuda, Rajaratha, and so on. Harishmashru is the minister, who is an ocean of knowledge, and Shatabindu is the priest, who is a master of all eight branches of knowledge." || 60-61 ||

"Thus, Ashvagriva is the lord of the entire kingdom and the master of both armies. Therefore, it is to him that we should give our daughter." || 62 ||

After considering the words of Sushruta, the wise minister Bahushruta, with his eyes of memory, spoke these beautiful words to the king. He said, "What Sushruta has said is true, but there are some things to consider. The nine qualities of a husband are: noble birth, good health, youth, good character, knowledge, good physique, wealth, a good family, and a good entourage. Ashvagriva has all these qualities, but he is too old. Therefore, we should find another husband who is of the same age as our daughter and who has the same qualities as Ashvagriva." || 63-65 ||

"The king of Gaganavallabhapur is known as Chitraraha. The best king in Meghapur is Padmaratha. The lord of Chitrapur is Rijaya. The king of Tripuranagara, the city of the Vidyadharis, is Lalitangada. The king of Kanakapur is Kanakaratha, who is very skilled in knowledge. The king of Maharatanapur is Dhananjaya, who is the lord of all the Vidyadharis. It is certain that we should give our daughter to one of these." || 66-68 ||

Bahushruta's 
1 Nripavarga G.

Page #171:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Chapter

If you wish to give your daughter to a groom who possesses good lineage, health, age, and appearance, then listen to what I have to say.  || 70 ||

In the north of the Vijayardha mountain range, there is a city called Surendrakantar. Its king is named Meghavahana. His beloved wife is named Meghamalini. || 71 ||

They have a son named Vidyutprabha, who is radiant like lightning, and a daughter named Jyotirmaala, who is pure like a garland.  The king of birds, Meghavahana, was blessed with both a son and a daughter, who were like good deeds and wisdom respectively. || 72 ||

One day, Meghavahana went to Siddhakoota to offer praise. There, he saw the wise charana, Vardharma, and bowed to him.  After listening to the nature of dharma, he asked about his son's previous birth. The charana said, "Listen, O Vidyaadhara, with a focused mind. I will tell you." || 73-74 ||

In the eastern Videha region of Jambudvipa, there is a country called Vatsakavati. In it, there is a city called Prabhakari, ruled by a handsome king named Nandana. || 75 ||

He had a son named Vijayabhadra, born from his wife Jayasena. One day, Vijayabhadra saw a mango tree bearing fruit in a beautiful garden.  Some days later, he saw the same tree without fruit. This sight caused him to develop dispassion, and he renounced the world, taking vows of restraint with four thousand kings under the guidance of his guru, Pihiitasrava. || 76-77 ||

At the end of his life, he attained the divine state of a seven-ocean lifespan in the Chakraka celestial chariot of the Mahendra heaven. There, he enjoyed divine pleasures for a long time. || 78 ||

From there, he was reborn as your son, and he will attain nirvana in this very life.  I, the minister Shruta-sagara, went to the Siddhakoota Jinalaya to praise Vardharma, the charana muni, and heard all this. || 79 ||

Therefore, this daughter should be given to Vidyutprabha, who is endowed with all auspicious qualities.  And we will accept his virtuous sister, Jyotirmaala, for the purpose of Arkkirti. || 80 ||

Hearing these words of Shruta-sagara, the wisest minister, Sumati, spoke, "Many Vidyaadhara kings desire this daughter. Therefore, it is not advisable to give her to Vidyutprabha, as it could lead to conflict with many kings. In my opinion, a swayamvara would be the best solution."  Having said this, he fell silent. || 81-82 ||

Everyone agreed with this proposal.  Therefore, the king of birds, Meghavahana, dismissed all the ministers and, with a heart filled with the words of the third minister, Shruta, who was known for his clear understanding, he began to speak these beautiful words: || 83 ||

Page #172:
---------------------------
144
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, asks who will be the beloved of Swayamprabha. The one who knows the meaning of the Puranas answers: 84
The Guru, while explaining the first Purana, said that the first Chakravarti, the first Keshava, had a story related to him. 85
In this Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, there is a country called Pushkalavati. Near its city of Pandarikini, in the Madhuka forest, lived a king of the Bhils named Pururava. 86
One day, while wandering lost, he saw the sage Sagaraseena and accumulated merit on the path. He renounced meat, alcohol, and honey and was born in the Saudharma heaven. 87
From there, he was born as the son of your wife Anantseena, named Marichi. He is devoted to giving false advice, so he will wander in this cycle of samsara for a long time. He will be the lord of the beautiful city of Podanapura, the son of the great king Prajapati, born from his queen Mrigavati. 89
Prajapati will have another son named Vijay, born from his queen Bhadra, who will be the elder brother of Triprutha. 90
These two brothers will be the lords of three regions, killing the enemy Ashvagriva in the tirtha of Shreyansanath. They will be the first Balabhadra Narayana. 91
Triprutha will wander in samsara and become the last Tirthankara. 92
You were born in the lineage of King Kachchha's son Namik, so you are related to Triprutha, who was born in the lineage of Bahubali. 93
This girl should be given to Triprutha, the lord of the three regions, the lord of Lakshmi and happiness. She will be his beloved, the one who steals his heart. 94
By giving this girl to Triprutha, you will become the lord of all the Vidyadharas. Therefore, you should be certain of this, as it was said by the first Tirthankara. 95
Thus, the king of Rathnupura, with joy, held the words of the one who knows the signs in his heart. He worshipped the one who knows the signs. 96
He sent a messenger named Indu, with excellent writing and gifts, to King Prajapati. 97
The king knew from the one who knows the signs, Jayagupta, that Triprutha would be the husband of Swayamprabha. Therefore, he received the messenger of the Vidyadhara king with great honor, as he descended from the sky, in the Pushpakarandaka forest. 98

Page #173:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Festival

**145** The messenger, having entered Rajagaha, went to the assembly hall. He sat on his seat and presented the gifts brought by him. **1.0** Seeing the gifts, the king expressed his affection. The messenger, being pleased with the gifts, said, "We are satisfied with these gifts." **10**  "Sri Triprishta, the eldest of the Kumaras, should be adorned with this daughter, named Swayamprabha, who is like Lakshmi." **102** Hearing this true message, the Lord of beings was filled with double joy. Hearing the words, he placed his hand on his head. **103** "If the king of the birds himself is worried about arranging this and other festivities for his son-in-law, then what are we?" **104** Thus, the king, pleased with the success of the mission, honored the messenger, gave him gifts, and quickly dismissed him. **105** The messenger, going quickly, reached the king of Rathnupura. After bowing down, he announced the success of the auspicious work. **106** Hearing this, the king of the birds, filled with great joy, thought, "There is no time to waste." He, along with his daughter, went to Podanapura with great pomp and show. **107** At that time, there were arches erected everywhere in the city, sandalwood was sprinkled, and there was a sense of excitement everywhere. The line of flags, with their fluttering arms, seemed to be calling out. The king, according to his wealth, welcomed him. Thus, he entered the city with great joy. **108-109** After entering, the king placed him in a suitable place and honored him as a guest. His heart and face were filled with joy from this honor. **110** He satisfied the entire earth with the materials suitable for the wedding and gave his daughter, Swayamprabha, who was like another Prabha, to Triprishta. He also gave him two Vidyaas, named Simhavahiini and Garudahiini, to make the marriage successful. Thus, they all together dived into the ocean of happiness. **111-112** Meanwhile, in the city of Ashvagriva Pratinarayana, three types of calamities, which announce destruction, happened very quickly. **113** Just as at the end of the third Kalpa, the Palyas,

Page #174:
---------------------------
146
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, Ashvagriva, overwhelmed with anxiety, asked the sage Shatabindu in private, "What is the meaning of this omen? What is its consequence?" 115
"The one who killed the lion in the Sindhu country, who forcefully took the offering sent to you, and for whom the king of Rathnupura, Jwalanajati, gave you a worthy woman as a gift, will cause you great distress." 116-117
"All these omens are indicative of him. You should take action against him." 118
Having heard this from the sage, Ashvagriva, keeping it in his heart, said to his ministers, "Self-knowing people destroy enemies and diseases as soon as they arise, but we have foolishly forgotten this due to our pride." 119-120
"Even now, this wicked one is worthy of being destroyed like the sprout of poison, by you without delay." 120
The ministers, having investigated everything through their secret agents, confirmed the truth of the sage's words about the lion killing, etc., and concluded that the son of Prajapati, Tripṛṣṭha, was a great arrogant one on this earth. He, with his prowess, was trying to conquer all the kings. 121-122
"We should test him, how he feels about us, whether he is friendly or hostile. We should send simple, sincere messengers to test him." The ministers said this to the king separately. 123
Hearing this, the king immediately sent two wise messengers, Chintagati and Manogati, to Tripṛṣṭha. 124
Going there, they first informed the king of their arrival, then saw him, and then, bowing respectfully, offered him a suitable gift. 125
Then they said, "King Ashvagriva has ordered you to come to the mountain called Rathavarta, as I am going there." 126
"We have come to bring you. You should accept his order and come." They said this loudly. Hearing this, Tripṛṣṭha became very angry and said, "I have seen Ashvagriva (horse-necked), Kharagriva (donkey-necked), Kraunchagriva (crane-necked), and Kramelakagriva (camel-necked). He is not a new person for us to see." 127-128
When he finished speaking, the messengers said, "He, Ashvagriva, is the lord of all the Vidyadharas, the master of all. 
1 Kuru etasya. 2 Taḥ lo. Asmakam.

Page #175:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Festival

They said, "The lord of birds is partial, he cannot be stopped. I will not go to see him," he replied. || 130 || "This should not be said without seeing the Chakravarti. Even in the body, there is no stability, who then deserves to stand?" || 131 || Hearing these words of the king, they both decided to revolve the wheel. Is he the cause of pots and other things, the chief of causes? || 132 || "What is there to see?" When asked, they angrily replied, "This jewel of a daughter, fit for the Chakravarti, is it now digesting for you? And how can the king of Rathnupura, with his burning hair, and Prajapati, even keep his name safe when the Chakravarti is angry?" || 133-134 || Immediately, the two messengers, swift-moving, departed from there. Reaching Ashvagriva, they bowed and told him the news of Tripruṣṭha's pride. || 135 || Ashvagriva, unable to bear it, with harsh eyes, caused the war-commencing drum to be sounded. || 136 || Its sound, destroying the pride of the elephants, spread to the ends of the directions. Indeed, when the Chakravarti is angry, what great men are not afraid? || 137 || With his four-armed army, he went to the Rathāvarta mountain. Meteors fell, the earth trembled, and fires blazed in the directions. || 138 || When the two sons of Prajapati, whose power spread everywhere and who had consumed the fuel of their enemies with the fire of their prowess, heard this, they came forward. || 139 || There, a great battle took place between the two armies. The destruction of both armies was equal, so Yama truly attained the position of mediator. || 140 || After fighting for a long time, Tripruṣṭha thought, "Why is the destruction of the soldiers in vain?" Thinking this, he went to face Ashvagriva for battle. || 141 || Ashvagriva, bound by a great enmity from past lives, was very angry, and he covered his enemy with a shower of arrows. || 142 || Unable to conquer each other in a duel, both, fueled by their great knowledge, prepared to engage in a magical battle. || 143 || Ashvagriva, for a long time, threw his wheel at Tripruṣṭha. Then, in anger, Keshava seized it and cut off his head. || 144 ||

Page #176:
---------------------------
148
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Triprishta and Vijay, who were like the moon and the sun, were victorious in battle and became rulers of half of the Bharat Kshetra. || 145 || They were crowned by the kings, the celestial beings, the Vyantaras, and the Magadhas. Triprishta became the supreme ruler of the earth. || 146 || Triprishta, the first of the Narayanas, was delighted to give the rulership of both the श्रेणियों to the father of Swayamprabha. What is impossible for those who have the blessings of the great ones? || 147 || The seven jewels of Narayana were the sword, conch, bow, discus, spear, staff, and mace. They were protected by the group of gods. || 148 || The jewel garland, the shining plough, the mace, and the club were the four great jewels of Balabhadra, who attained liberation. || 149 || Narayana had sixteen thousand wives, starting with Swayamprabha, and Balabhadra had eight thousand wives, all endowed with beauty and virtues. || 150 || The celestial being Jwalanaji gave his daughter, Jyotirmaala, to the prince Arkakirti in a Prajapati marriage, with great pomp and ceremony. || 151 || Arkakirti and Jyotirmaala had a son named Amitateja and a daughter named Sutara. These two siblings were as beautiful as the lines of the moon on the fifteenth day of the bright fortnight. || 152 || Triprishta Narayana had a son named Srivijaya from his queen Swayamprabha, followed by a son named Vijayabhadra and a daughter named Jyotirbha. || 153 || The great king Prajapati, who had attained great prosperity, was overcome by dispassion and went to the guru Pihiitasrava, renounced all his possessions, and took on the form of the Jinesvara, which leads to the attainment of the nature of the blissful, supreme Self. || 154-155 || The muni Prajapati, who was constantly engaged in the twelve types of austerities, consisting of six external and six internal, performed austerities for a long time and at the end of his life, he stabilized his mind and gradually renounced the states of false belief, non-restraint, carelessness, attachment, and the state of being bound by karma. He attained the highest state of liberation. || 156-157 || When the king of the celestial beings, Jwalanaji, heard this news, he gave his kingdom to Arkakirti and took the Digambara vows in the presence of the Jannanandan muni. || 158 || He did not beg, he did not accept anything without giving, he was simple, he renounced everything, he did not desire anything, 
1 Pariprapt K, Kh, G, Gh. 2 Shra Kaivalya Sayogatva K, Kh.

Page #177:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Second Festival
146
Then, having destroyed all the enemies, he became free from all conditions. Though formless, he became form and attained the supreme Nirvana. || 160 ||
Tripṛṣṭha, the victor, followed by Vijay, conquered the cruel enemies and enjoyed the pleasures of the three-part, undivided earth as he wished. || 161 ||
One day, Tripṛṣṭha, through the ceremony of the svayamvara, had his daughter Jyotiprabha place a garland around the neck of Amitatejas, his son-in-law. || 162 ||
Sutara, filled with love, also, through the same ceremony of the svayamvara, became the resident of the chest of Śrīvijaya. || 163 ||
Thus, all the families, who had formed relationships through their sons and daughters, were enjoying the beauty of a flourishing lake filled with pure water. || 164 ||
At the end of his life, the half-chakravarti Tripṛṣṭha went to the seventh hell, and Vijay, the strong one, gave the kingdom to his son Śrīvijaya and made Vijayabhadra the crown prince. He was eager to destroy the enemy in the form of sin, though his mind was filled with sorrow for Nārāyaṇa. However, as he was about to attain liberation in the near future, he went to the Muni Raja, named Suvarṇakumbha, and along with seven thousand kings, he took the vow of non-violence. || 165-167 ||
He destroyed the evil karma and generated the knowledge of liberation, and became the Anāgāra Kevali, worshipped by the gods. || 168 ||
Hearing this, Arka-kirti placed Amitatejas on the throne and himself took the vow of austerity from the Cāraṇa Muni named Vipulamati. || 169 ||
After some time, he destroyed the eight karmas and obtained the desired eighth earth. It is right, because what is unattainable for those who have renounced hope in this world? That is, nothing. || 170 ||
On the other hand, Amitatejas and Śrīvijaya both had unwavering love for each other, and their time passed peacefully without any anxiety. || 171 ||
One day, a man came to King Śrīvijaya and, giving his blessings, said, "O King! Pay attention to my words." || 172 ||
"From today, on the seventh day, a great storm will fall on the head of the king of Podanapura. Therefore, think about retaliation quickly." || 173 ||
Hearing this, the crown prince became angry, and his eyes turned red with anger. He said to the astrologer, "If you are all-knowing, then tell me what will fall on your head at that time?" || 174 ||
The astrologer also said, "At that time, a rain of jewels will fall on my head along with the anointing ceremony." || 175 ||
To give up anger, etc., to practice knowledge, and to meditate - they attained all these qualities. || 15 ||
They renounced all sins and became free from duality. Though formless, they became form and attained the supreme Nirvana. || 160 ||
Here, Vijay, the strong one, followed by Tripṛṣṭha, conquered the cruel enemies and enjoyed the pleasures of the three-part, undivided earth as he wished. || 161 ||
One day, Tripṛṣṭha, through the ceremony of the svayamvara, had his daughter Jyotiprabha place a garland around the neck of Amitatejas, his son-in-law. || 162 ||
Sutara, filled with love, also, through the same ceremony of the svayamvara, became the resident of the chest of Śrīvijaya. || 163 ||
Thus, all the families, who had formed relationships through their sons and daughters, were enjoying the beauty of a flourishing lake filled with pure water. || 164 ||
At the end of his life, the half-chakravarti Tripṛṣṭha went to the seventh hell, and Vijay, the strong one, gave the kingdom to his son Śrīvijaya and made Vijayabhadra the crown prince. He was eager to destroy the enemy in the form of sin, though his mind was filled with sorrow for Nārāyaṇa. However, as he was about to attain liberation in the near future, he went to the Muni Raja, named Suvarṇakumbha, and along with seven thousand kings, he took the vow of non-violence. || 165-167 ||
He destroyed the evil karma and generated the knowledge of liberation, and became the Anāgāra Kevali, worshipped by the gods. || 168 ||
Hearing this, Arka-kirti placed Amitatejas on the throne and himself took the vow of austerity from the Cāraṇa Muni named Vipulamati. || 169 ||
After some time, he destroyed the eight karmas and obtained the desired eighth earth. It is right, because what is unattainable for those who have renounced hope in this world? That is, nothing. || 170 ||
On the other hand, Amitatejas and Śrīvijaya both had unwavering love for each other, and their time passed peacefully without any anxiety. || 171 ||
One day, a man came to King Śrīvijaya and, giving his blessings, said, "O King! Pay attention to my words." || 172 ||
"From today, on the seventh day, a great storm will fall on the head of the king of Podanapura. Therefore, think about retaliation quickly." || 173 ||
Hearing this, the crown prince became angry, and his eyes turned red with anger. He said to the astrologer, "If you are all-knowing, then tell me what will fall on your head at that time?" || 174 ||
The astrologer also said, "At that time, a rain of jewels will fall on my head along with the anointing ceremony." || 175 ||

Page #178:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

150
The king, hearing the sage's words from the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, was astonished. He said, "O Bhadra, please sit on this seat, I have something to ask you." 176

"Tell me, what is your gotra? Who is your guru? What scriptures have you studied? What are the auspicious signs you know? What is your name? And why are you giving this order?" The king asked. 177

The knower of auspicious signs said, "In the city of Kundala, there was a great king named Siharatha. His priest was named Suraguru, and he had a very learned disciple." 178

"One day, after taking initiation with Balabhadra, I studied the eight-fold auspicious signs with his disciple and listened to his teachings." 179

"What are these eight-fold auspicious signs and what are their characteristics? If you want to know this, O victorious Ayushman, listen, I will tell you according to your question." 180

"The knowers of the scriptures, the Acharyas, have described eight types of auspicious signs based on the distinctions of space, earth, body, sound, gesture, characteristics, severed, and dreams." 181

"The moon, sun, planets, stars, and constellations - these five types of astrologers reside in the sky or are always in the company of the sky, therefore they are called celestial. The true description of victory, defeat, loss, gain, sorrow, life, profit, loss, and other matters that occur through their rising, setting, etc., is called celestial auspicious sign." 182-183

"To tell about someone's loss, gain, etc., based on the difference in the location of the earth, and to tell about the gems kept inside the earth, is called earthly auspicious sign." 184

"The description of the auspicious and inauspicious events that occur in the three periods of time for living beings, based on the touch or sight of the body and its parts, is called bodily auspicious sign." 185

"The knowledge of sound auspicious sign is to inform about the attainment of desired objects through the sweet sounds of drums, elephants, etc., and the inauspicious sounds of inanimate and animate objects." 186

"To tell about someone's profit, loss, etc., based on the marks or wounds that appear on the head, face, etc., is called gesture auspicious sign." 187

"To tell about the attainment of enjoyment, wealth, etc., based on the characteristics of the one hundred and eight auspicious signs found in the body, such as the Sri tree and the swastika, is called characteristic auspicious sign." 188

"The holes made by mice, etc., in clothes and weapons, etc., are of three types based on the distinction of gods, humans, and demons. The fruit that is told from them is called severed auspicious sign." 189

"Dreams are of two types based on the distinction of auspicious and inauspicious. To tell the truth about the growth and destruction, etc., of humans based on seeing them, is called dream auspicious sign." 190

Page #179:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Second Chapter

Having said this, I, afflicted by twenty-two afflictions like hunger and thirst, unable to bear them, went to the city of Padmini Khet.  || 191 || There, my maternal uncle, Soma Sharma, gave me his daughter, Chandranana, born of Hiranyaloma, with great affection. || 192 || Abandoning the pursuit of wealth, I became engrossed in the study of omens. Seeing me impoverished, she, distressed by the depletion of the wealth given by her father, || 193 || on the occasion of a meal, threw all the coins I had collected into our bowl, saying, "This is the wealth you have earned." || 194 || Seeing a beautiful crystal plate, where the embers of the fire were burning, and the stream of water from my wife's hand washing my hands, || 195 || I was certain of prosperity and joy. The order has been given to you by the infallible-tongued Muni now. || 196 || Hearing this, the king, with his reasoning, said to his ministers, "This is to be understood, consider the countermeasure. Who would delay when the root is destroyed?" || 197 ||  "To protect you," said the wise minister, Sumati, "we will place you in a chest of iron and sink it in the ocean." || 199 || Hearing this, the wise minister, Subuddhi, said, "No, there are crocodiles and other dangers there. We will place you in the cave of the Vijayardha mountain." || 200 || When Subuddhi's words were finished, the wise and knowledgeable about ancient tales, the minister Buddhisagar, began to narrate this famous story. || 201 || In the city of Singhapura in this Bharat Kshetra, there lived a wanderer named Soma, who was extremely arrogant due to his listening to false scriptures. He debated with Jinadas, but was defeated. || 202 || At the end of his life, he was reborn as a large buffalo in the same city. A merchant loaded him with a heavy burden of salt and made him carry it for a long time. || 203 || When he became unable to carry the load, he was neglected by those who had previously fed him. He became a jati-smar, bound to the city, and his hatred subsided. || 204 ||

Page #180:
---------------------------
152
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, a wicked demon was born in the cremation ground. The two rulers of that city were Kumbha and Bhima. The cook of Kumbha was Rasayanapaka. 205
Since there was no meat available, such as Rasayana and other types of cooked meat, he fed the demon the flesh of a baby. 206
The wicked demon, being fond of the taste, began to eat human flesh from that time onwards, eager to attain the hellish state. 207
The king is the protector of the people, and he remains king as long as he is able to protect them. But this one has started eating humans, so he is to be abandoned, thought the ministers, and they abandoned him. 208
The cruel demon, who lived on human flesh, killed his cook at some point, and having mastered the knowledge, he subdued the demon. 209
He then roamed around, eating people every day, and all the citizens, terrified, abandoned the city. 210
They entered the city of Karkata, a city of great fear. But the wicked Kumbha king also came there and began to eat the people. 211
From that time onwards, they called the city Kumbhakarkatapura. Seeing that he was a cannibal, the people, in fear, made arrangements for him: "You shall eat one cartload of rice and one human being every day." 212
In that same city, there lived a Brahmin named Chandakoushika. His wife was Somashri, and after worshipping the spirits for a long time, they had a son named Mundakoushika. 213-214
One day, it was Mundakoushika's turn to be the food for Kumbha. They were taking him on a cart when some spirits carried him away. Kumbha, with a club in his hand, pursued them. The spirits, afraid of his attack, threw Mundakoushika into a hole in fear, but a python swallowed the Brahmin there. 215-216
Therefore, it is not right to keep the king in the cave of Vijayardha. Hearing these beneficial words of Buddhisagar, the minister Matisagar, who possessed subtle intelligence, said, "The astrologer has not said that the forest will fall on the king. He has said that the thunderbolt will fall on the king of Podanapura, so let another man be made the king of Podanapura." 217-218
From that time onwards, they called it...

Page #181:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Festival

**Chapter 153**

The ministers, having accepted his words as true, gathered together and placed a reflection of a Yaksha on the king's throne. They worshipped him, saying, "You are the lord of Podanpur." The king, having renounced the enjoyment of the kingdom, began to perform acts of worship, charity, and other virtuous deeds. He entered the Jina Chaitya with his entourage, performing the ceremony of peace.

On the seventh day, a fierce thunderbolt fell upon the image of the Yaksha with a loud roar. When the disturbance subsided, the inhabitants of the city celebrated with great joy, beating drums and making a grand festival.

The king, with great joy, summoned the learned astrologer and honored him, giving him a hundred villages along with the Padmini Khet. The chief ministers, with devotion, performed the ceremony of peace for the Arhant Bhagwan, the lord of the three worlds, and performed the great abhisheka. They placed the king on the throne and performed his coronation with golden pitchers, establishing him in a prosperous kingdom.

Thus, his time passed in great happiness. One day, he learned the celestial art from his mother and mastered it. With a desire to enjoy with the Sutara, he went to the Jyotirvana. He was there, enjoying himself as he pleased, sitting with his queen.

Meanwhile, the king of Chamarachanchpur, Indraashani, the son of Queen Asuri, a wealthy Vidyaadhara named Ashanighosha, was returning to his city after mastering the Bhamarī Vidya. Seeing the Sutara, he desired her and attempted to abduct her.

He separated the king from the Sutara by the trick of a fake deer. He then assumed the form of Shrivijaya and returned to the Sutara.

He said, "My dear, that deer ran away with the speed of the wind. I was unable to catch him, so I returned. Now the sun is setting, so let us both go to our city."

Saying this, the deceitful Vidyaadhara placed the Sutara on his flying chariot and departed. In the middle of the journey, he revealed his true form. Seeing this, the Sutara was greatly disturbed and exclaimed, "Who is this?"

The Vidyaadhara, Ashanighosha, who had assumed the form of the Sutara, said...

Page #182:
---------------------------
154
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, Srivijaya, having been bitten by a serpent disguised as a rooster, feigned death in great distress. Seeing this, Podana, the king, knowing that the poison could not be cured by gems, mantras, or medicines, became eager to die with the deceitful woman out of affection. He built a pyre, ignited its fuel with fire born from the Surya Kanta gem, and, consumed by grief, ascended the pyre with the deceitful woman. 

When two celestial beings were passing by, one of them, a great sage, remembering the Vidya Vichchedini Vidya, kicked the terrified Vaitali with his left foot, causing her to reveal her true form. Unable to stand before Srivijaya, she vanished. 

Seeing this, King Srivijaya was filled with wonder. He asked, "What is this?" The celestial being then narrated the story:

"In the southern range of the Vijaya mountain in the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa, there is a city called Jyoti Prabhu. I am the king of that city, Sambhinna. This is my wife, Sarvakalyani, and this is my son, Dipshikha. I had gone with my lord, Amittej, the king of Rathnupur, to the vast garden known as Shikharnal. On my return, I heard a woman crying on her celestial chariot, saying, 'Where is my lord, Srivijaya? O lord of Rathnupur, where are you? Protect me!' Hearing her sorrowful words, I went there and asked, 'Who are you? And whom are you taking away?' Hearing my words, she said, 'I am Ashanighosha, the celestial being, king of Chamarachanch city. I am being taken away by force. If you have the power, come and rescue me.'

Hearing this, I decided that this must be my lord Amittej's younger sister. How could I go as an ordinary human? I will kill him right now. I was about to engage in battle with him when the woman stopped me, saying, 'Don't fight unnecessarily out of compulsion. The king of Podanpur is in Jyotirvana, consumed by the fire of grief due to my separation. Go there and inform him of my condition."

Page #183:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Second Chapter
155
"Thus, O King, I have come here, sent by your beloved wife. This is the Vaitali Devi, commanded by your enemy, and I have brought her with great respect." || 250 ||
Hearing this, the Lord of Podana, with great respect, said, "Tell me this news quickly, for you are my true friend." || 251 ||
"This celestial being, who is the brother of Majanan, has been told that you are suffering due to my absence. He has immediately sent his son, Deepashikha, to Podana." || 252 ||
"Even in Podana, there has been much upheaval and confusion. Seeing this, Amoghjihvā and Jayagupta, the wise ones, were greatly concerned." || 253 ||
"There was some fear for the Lord, but it has now passed. Someone will come today with good news." || 254 ||
"Let all of you remain calm, do not fear. Thus, they, including Swayamprabha, were reassuring them." || 255 ||
"Similarly, Deepashikha, the celestial being, descended from the sky to the earth. He bowed to Swayamprabha and her son, and with various wise words, said, "The Lord of Srivijaya is well, and all is well. Do not fear." Thus, he narrated all the news as it was." || 256-257 ||
"Hearing this news, Swayamprabha was like a creeper wilted by fire, or the flame of a dying lamp, or a cuckoo mourning at the sound of rain clouds, or a Syadvadi scholar whose false doctrines have been refuted. She was utterly distraught." || 258-259 ||
"Then, Swayamprabha, with her army and her son, left the forest and came to the place where the celestial being was." || 260 ||
"Seeing her mother coming from afar, with her younger brother, the Lord of Podana rushed towards her and fell at her feet." || 261 ||
"Seeing her son, Swayamprabha's eyes filled with tears of joy. She said, "Rise, my son! I have seen you by the grace of my good fortune. May you live long!" Thus, she embraced Srivijaya, touched him, and felt immense joy. Then, when Srivijaya was comfortably seated, she asked him about the abduction of Sutara and other matters." || 262-263 ||
"Srivijaya said, "This celestial being, Sambhi
1-Navruttakam.

Page #184:
---------------------------
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

"Even the remaining part belongs to me, therefore he also did not experience it." Thus saying, she sent her younger son back to protect the city, and taking her elder son with her, she went to the city of Rathnupura by the aerial path.  Knowing from the spies who roamed her country, she was aware of the great brilliance of Amitatejas.  With great splendor, she went to meet him, and pleased with him, she entered her city, which was adorned with high flags and arches.  

Amitatejas, the lord of the Vidyadharas, welcomed them as guests, and knowing the reason for their arrival, he sent a messenger named Marichi to Ashanighosha, the son of Indraashani.  He spoke harsh words to the messenger.  The messenger returned and reported all the words to Amitatejas.  Hearing them, Amitatejas, in consultation with his ministers, resolved to destroy Ashanighosha, who was intoxicated with pride.  With great respect, he gave his brother-in-law, who had a lofty ambition, the three traditional arts of warfare, namely, Yuddhavirya, Praharanavaran, and Bandhamochan, for the destruction of the enemy.

And he told Shrivijaya, the king of Podanapura, to go against the arrogant enemy with his five hundred sons, including Rashmivega, Suvega, and others.  And he himself, along with his elder son, Sahasrarashmi, went to the foot of the great stupa of Sanjayanta, near the Himanta mountain, the place where the Vidyadharas perfected their arts, to perfect the art of Mahajvala, which could destroy all arts.

When Ashanighosha heard that Shrivijaya was coming to battle with Rashmivega and others, he sent out his sons, Sughosha, Shataghosha, Sahasragosha, and others, in anger.  All his sons, grandsons, and others fought for fifteen days and were finally defeated.  When Ashanighosha heard this news, he was consumed with anger and went to fight himself, his pronouncements all announcing his own destruction.

In the battle, Shrivijaya struck Ashanighosha in two places to destroy him.  Ashanighosha, however, created two forms of himself by the art of Bhramari.  Shrivijaya struck them both in two places to destroy them, but Ashanighosha created four forms of himself.  Thus, the battle became a game of illusions, with Ashanighosha constantly multiplying himself.

Page #185:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Festival

**157** Then, the Vidya-adhipati, the king of Rathnupura, having attained Siddhi, commanded the Mahajvala Vidya, which Asanighosha was unable to withstand. **28** The battle lasted for half a month, and the victorious Jineshvara, fleeing in fear, entered the Samavasarana near the mountain called Nabheya-sima, close to the Gajadhwaja. **281** Seeing this, the king of birds, along with his followers, became enraged and pursued him. Upon seeing the Manastambha, their minds calmed down. **282** They circumambulated the Jina thrice, prostrated before the Lord of the Universe, and, spitting out the poison of their enmity, sat together there. **283** Then, the Asuri Devi, Sati, who was virtuous by nature, brought her daughter, Sutara, who was like a withered creeper, and, addressing Srivijaya and Amitateja, said, "May you both forgive the offense of my son." **284-285** Even if there is inherent enmity in the lower species, it is destroyed by the association of the Jinas. What then can be said of humans? **286** If the karmas, bound since beginningless time, are released by the remembrance of the Jinas, then there is no wonder in the release of enmity in their presence. **287** Even Yama, who is difficult to overcome, is easily restrained by the mere remembrance of the Jinas. What other enemy can be restrained, who is not restrained by this? **288** Therefore, wise people should remember the Jina, the Lord of the three worlds, for the sake of overcoming Yama. He is the one who brings benefit in this world and the next. **289** 

Then, the lord of the Vidya-dharas, Amitateja, with folded hands, prostrated before the Jina with great devotion and, with a desire to know the truth, asked about the nature of the right path. **290** Who can cross the terrible ocean of the world, filled with the waves of countless sorrows and teeming with crocodiles of passions? This can only be asked of the Jina, for he alone has crossed the ocean of the world. O Lord, you alone are the friend of the world. Therefore, teach us, your disciples, the nature of the right path. **291-292** By your great voice, like a large boat, those who possess the three jewels as their great wealth, will reach their destination, the shore of the ocean of births, and attain the means of happiness. **293**

Page #186:
---------------------------
158
The divine voice then spoke to him, saying, "O Dev, listen! Just as the chataka birds are satisfied by the rain in the east, so too are the bhavyas satisfied by the divine voice." ||29|| "Listen, O bhavy, the cause of this world is karma, and the cause of karma is mithyatva, asamyam, etc." ||295|| "Mithyatva is the result of the arising of mithyatva karma, which perverts knowledge. Know this mithyatva to be the cause of bondage." ||296|| "Ignorance, doubt, ekant, vipreet, and vinaya are the five types of mithyatva, as understood by the wise." ||297|| "In beings who are characterized by the names of papa and dharma, the result of the arising of mithyatva karma is called ajnana mithyatva." ||298|| "Due to the multiplicity of prapta and agama, etc., there is fluctuation in the nature of the tattva. Know this, O wise one, as samshaya mithyatva." ||299|| "In the substance, its synonyms, or in the means of liberation, which are samyagdarshan, samyagjnana, and samyakcharitra, the firm conviction in only one of these is called ekant mithyatva." ||300|| "Know that which causes the wrong judgment of the true nature of jnana, jnanak, and jneya in the self as vipreet mithyatva." ||301|| "The mithyatva that arises when all beings are worshipped by the mind, speech, and body, and all things are considered as means of liberation, is called vinaya mithyatva." ||302|| "The actions of the mind, speech, and body of a person without vows are called asamyam. Knowledgeable people have said that there are two types of asamyam: praniasamyam and indriyasamyam." ||303|| "As long as the a-pratyakhyana avarna, charitra, and moha arise in beings, i.e., until the fourth guna-sthana, asamyam is considered the cause of bondage." ||304|| "The actions of the mind, speech, and body that cause doubt in the vows are called pramad. This pramad is the cause of bondage until the sixth guna-sthana." ||305|| "The fifteen types of pramad are said to arise from the arising of the sanjvalana kshaya, and they are the cause of pratyashchit for beings who are endowed with the three charitras: samayaik, chhedopasthapana, and pariharavishuddhi." ||306|| "The results that arise from the arising of the four sanjvalanas: krodha, mana, maya, and lobha, in the four guna-sthana from the seventh to the tenth, are called kshaya. These four kshayas are the cause of bondage in these four guna-sthana." ||307|| "The kshaya, as described by the Jinas in sixteen forms, is the cause of bondage from the beginning of the upshanta, and it continues throughout the sthiti and anubhaga." ||308||

Page #187:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Chapter

**156**

The movement of the soul through its regions is called yoga, and it is the cause of bondage. This yoga is the single cause of bondage in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth *guna-sthana* for the *sa-vedaniya*.  || 30 ||

Mental yoga is of four types, verbal yoga is of four types, and bodily yoga is of seven types. All these yogas are the cause of *prakriti* and *pradesa* bondage, as per their respective capacities.  || 31 ||

O Aryas! The living being is always bound by the one hundred and twenty *karma-prakriti* through the five *mithyatva* etc., in their respective places. || 311 ||

Due to these *prakriti*, the living being repeatedly wanders through the various *paryaya* like *gati* etc. In the first *guna-sthana*, all living beings are equal. There, the living being is endowed with three *ajnanas* and three *adarshanas*. It has three *bhavas*: *audhayika*, *maya-pashmika*, and *parinaamika*. It lacks *samyama*. Some living beings are *bhavya* and some are *abhavya*. Thus, trapped in the whirlpool-like pit of the cycle of existence, the living being experiences various distinctions like birth, old age, death, disease, pleasure, and pain. It has been dwelling in this world since time immemorial.  || 312-313 ||

Some living beings, having obtained the *kala* etc. *labdhi*, overcome the seven *prakriti* like *mithyatva* etc. through the *parinaama* of *adha-karan*, *apuurva-karan*, and *anivritti-karan*. They sever the cycle of existence and attain *samyama* and *samyag-darshan*.  || 314 ||

Then, by the destruction of the *apratyakhyana-avaran* *kashaya*, they become *shravaka* and accept the twelve vows. Sometimes, by the destruction of the *pratyakhyana-avaran* *kashaya*, they attain *maha-vrat*. Sometimes, by the destruction of the seven *prakriti* like *ananta-anubandhi* *krodha*, *mana*, *maya*, *lobha*, *mithyatva*, *samya-mithyatva*, and *samyaktva*, they attain *kshayika* *samyag-darshan*. Sometimes, they are adorned with *kshayika* *charitra* arising from the destruction of the enemy in the form of *moha-karma*.  || 315-317 ||

Then, they become the holder of the second *shukla-dhyana* and destroy the three *ghati*. At that time, by attaining the nine *kevala-labdhi*, they become *arhanta* and are worshipped by all.  || 318 ||

After some time, by the third *shukla-dhyana*, they stop all yogas. And by the influence of the fourth *shukla-dhyana* called *samuccchinna-kriya-pratipaati*, they destroy all *karma-bandha*.  || 319 ||

Thus, O *bhavya*, like you, *bhavya* beings, by crossing the ocean of existence through the three types of *san-marga* attained in succession, always progress happily.  || 320 ||

Thus, having heard this description of the process of birth and liberation spoken by the Jinas, Amitateja, the lord of all *vidyadharas*, drank it like nectar.  || 32 ||

**Note:** The text refers to the sixteen types of *kashaya* mentioned by the Tirthankaras. This *kashaya* is considered to be the cause of *sthiti-bandha* and *anubhaga-bandha* in the *upashanta-moha* *guna-sthana*.  || 308 ||

Page #188:
---------------------------
## Chapter 160: The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

**Verse 32:**  Always attaining the fourfold attainment of time, endowed with right faith and purified, he adorned himself with the vows of a Shravaka.

**Verse 323:**  O Bhagavan! I wish to ask you something else that is in my mind. This Ashanighosha, knowing my influence, has abducted my younger sister Sutara. For what reason did he do this?

**Verse 324:**  The Jina Indra, in response, explained the reason as follows:

**Verse 325:**  In the Jambudvipa, in the Magadha country, there was a village called Achal. In this village lived a Brahmin named Dharanijata.

**Verse 326:**  His wife was Agnila, and they had two sons named Indrabhuta and Agnibhuti. Besides them, there was also a son of a maidservant named Kapil.

**Verse 327:**  When the Brahmin taught the Vedas to his sons, he kept Kapil separate. But Kapil was so sharp-minded that he learned the Vedas himself, both in terms of words and meaning. When the Brahmin learned of this, he became angry and said, "You have done this unworthy thing," and immediately expelled the maidservant's son from the house.

**Verse 328:**  Kapil, filled with sorrow, left from there and went to the city of Ratnapura.

**Verse 329:**  In Ratnapura, there lived a Brahmin named Satyaka. Seeing Kapil as learned and worthy, he offered him his daughter, born from a woman named Jambu.

**Verse 330:**  Thus, Kapil, revered by the king and a master of the essence of all scriptures, spent some years in Ratnapura, giving explanations that no one could refute.

**Verse 331:**  Kapil was indeed a scholar, but his conduct was not worthy of the Brahmin lineage. Therefore, his wife Satyabhama, considering his misconduct, was always in doubt about his parentage, wondering, "Whose son is he?"

**Verse 332:**  Meanwhile, Dharanijata became impoverished. He learned about Kapil's influence through tradition and went to him to alleviate his poverty.

**Verse 333:**  Seeing him arrive, Kapil was inwardly very angry, but outwardly he rose and greeted him with salutations.

**Verse 334:**  He seated him on a high seat and said, "Tell me, how are my mother and brothers? It is by my good fortune that you have come here."

Page #189:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Second Chapter

161. Having been asked, he satisfied him with bath, clothes, seat, etc. Out of fear of revealing the difference in their castes, he properly understood his mind. || 335 ||

He, the Brahmin, being overwhelmed by extreme poverty, considered him as his son and followed the path of maintaining the position of the needy. || 336 ||

Some days passed in this way for the two, keeping their affairs concealed. One day, Satyabhāma, having adorned the Brahmin with a lot of wealth, asked him in private, "Tell me the truth, is this your son? I do not believe that he is your son because of his evil character." || 337 ||

He, being envious of Kapil, desired to go home with the gold and wealth given by Satyabhāma. So, he told everything truthfully, as there is nothing difficult for wicked people. || 339 ||

Then, the king of that city was Śrīṣeṇa. He had two queens, Siṃhananditā and Aninditā. They had two sons, Indrasena and Upeṇḍrasena, who were as beautiful as Indra and the moon, and were the best among men. Both of these sons were very humble, so their parents were very pleased with them. || 340-341 ||

Satyabhāma, being proud of her lineage, did not want to live with her sinful husband and went to the king for refuge. || 342 ||

Then, Kapil, the deceitful Brahmin, who proclaimed injustice, sat near the king. He had placed his hand on his head due to sorrow. Seeing him and knowing his whole story, King Śrīṣeṇa thought, "There is nothing that is not fit to be done in the world for sinful, outcaste people. That is why kings collect such noble people, who never become corrupt in the beginning, middle, or end." || 343-345 ||

"He who desires love for a woman who is detached, while he himself is attached, desires red brilliance in an Indranīla gem." || 346 ||

Thinking like this, the king immediately expelled that wicked man from his country, as righteous people do not tolerate the loss of their dignity. || 347 ||

One day, the king received two Cārana sages, Ādityagati and Ariñjaya, who had come to his house. He welcomed them and gave them food and gifts.

Page #190:
---------------------------
162
The five wonders are obtained by giving food and water in the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana. The ten-limbed tree is obtained from the Uttar Kuru. The two queens, Satyabhama and the other, approved of the donation, so they also obtained the lifespan of Uttar Kuru. What is not possible through the company of the virtuous? || 349-350 ||
Then, in the city of Kaushambi, King Mahabala ruled. He had a queen named Shrimati, and they had a daughter named Shrikant. Shrikant was the epitome of beauty. || 351 ||
King Mahabala gave Shrikant to Indrasena in a marriage ceremony. Along with Shrikant, a common woman named Anantamati also went. She had a loving relationship with Upendrasena. Because of this, the two brothers who lived in the garden prepared for war. When the king heard this news, he went to stop them, but they were both lustful and angry, so the king was unable to stop them. The king loved both his sons very much. He was also very compassionate, so he could not bear the suffering of his sons. As a result, he died after smelling the poison flower. || 352-355 ||
The king's two wives and Satyabhama also died after smelling the same poison flower. This is because the motivation of karma is strange. || 356 ||
In the eastern part of the Dhataki Khand, there is a region called Uttar Kuru. In this region, the king and Singhnandita were a couple, and the queen was named Anindita Arya, and Satyabhama was her wife. Thus, they all lived happily there, enjoying the pleasures of the earth. || 357-358 ||
Then, a certain celestial being entered the midst of the two warring brothers and said, "Why are you two fighting in vain? This is your younger sister." Hearing his words, both the princes were surprised and asked, "How is that?" In reply, the celestial being said || 359-360 ||
"In the eastern part of the Dhataki Khand island, east of Mount Meru, there is a country called Pushkalavati. On the southern range of Mount Vijaya, there is a city called Adityabha. In that city, Sukundali, a celestial being, rules. Sukundali's wife's name is Mitra Sena. I am their son, named Manikundala. Once, I went to the city of Pundarikin, where I heard the eternal Dharma from Amitaprabha Jinendra. You are my past life connections, which I did not know before." || 361-363 ||

Page #191:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Second Pab
163
In the third Pushkara-named island, to the west of the Meru mountain, there is a country called Sarid, in the middle of which is the city of Vitashoka. 364
Its king was Chakradhvaja, his queen was Kanakamalika. Two daughters were born to them, Kanakalata and Padmalata. 365
The same king had another queen named Vidyumati, who had a daughter named Padmavati. Their time passed happily. One day, due to Kalalabdhi, Queen Kanakamalika and her two daughters drank the elixir of the words of the Ganini named Amitsena, and thus they died and became gods in the first heaven. Meanwhile, Padmavati saw a prostitute pleasing two lustful men, and she desired to be like her. After death, she became an Apsara in heaven. 366-368
Then, the soul of Kanakamalika, transmigrating from there, became the king named Manikundali, and the souls of her two daughters became princes in the city of Ratnapura. The Apsara mentioned above, transmigrating from heaven, became Anantamati. It is because of this Anantamati that the battle between you two princes is taking place today. 369-370
Thus, having heard the words spoken by the Jina, I have come here to stop you, who are unjust and ignorant of Dharma. 371
Thus, by the words of the Vidyadhara, the conflict between the two ceased, both of them attained self-knowledge, both of them quickly developed dispassion, both of them took initiation from the Sudharma Guru, both of them reached the end of the path of liberation, both of them became possessors of the qualities of Kshayika, Ananta-knowledge, etc., and both of them finally attained Nirvana. 372-373
And Anantamati, having taken on all the vows of a Shravaka in her heart, finally attained the heavenly realm. It is right, for what is not attainable by the grace of the virtuous? 374
The soul of King Shrishena, transmigrating from the realm of enjoyment, became the god named Shriprabha in the Shriprabha Vimana of the Saudharma heaven. The soul of Queen Singhnandita became the goddess named Vidyutprabha in the Shrinila Vimana of the same heaven. 375
The souls of Satyabhama Brahmani and the queen named Anindita became the goddess named Shuklaprabha and the god named Vimala-prabha respectively in the Vimala-prabha Vimana. 376
The soul of King Shrishena, having transmigrated from there after an existence of five Palyas, became you, the son of Arkakirti, who is blessed with such wealth. 377
Singhnandita, your 
1 Anantamatishcharu Kh, G. 2 Shriprame'bhavat L. 3-najanishta-L. 4 Tava Dyotih K, P, Bhavajyotih Kh.

Page #192:
---------------------------
164
Jyotiprabha was a woman, Devi Anindita's soul was Srivijaya, Satyabhama was a Sutara, and the former wicked Kapil wandered in misery for a long time and reached the forest of Sambhutaraman, where he was born on the banks of the river Airavati in the hermitage of the ascetics. 378-380 || There, that wicked man performed the vows of false ascetics for a long time. One day, seeing the wealth of the fickle-minded Vidyadhara, that fool made a decision in his mind, which is condemned by the wise. As a result of that, this Ashanighosha was born, and out of former affection, he abducted Sutara. 381-382 || His soul will be the fifth Chakravarti, the sixteenth Tirthankara, Shanti, the giver of peace to the virtuous, in the ninth Bhava to come. 383 || Thus, the radiance of the moon-like Jina's words, spread out, caused the lake of the heart of the Vidyadhara Indra, filled with lotuses, to bloom, due to the association of Amitateja. 384 || At that time, Ashanighosha, his mother Swayamprabha, Sutara, and many others, renounced the world and embraced the supreme restraint. 385 || All of them, starting with the son of the Chakravarti, praised the Jina, circumambulated him thrice, and went to their respective places with Amitateja. 386 || Here, the son of Arka Kirti, Amitateja, observed fasts in all the Paryas, and if he happened to break the rules of the vow he had taken, he would perform the appropriate atonement, always performed great worship, gave gifts of vessels, etc., with respect, listened to Dharma-katha, preached Dharma to the worthy, expanded the qualities of fearlessness, etc., destroyed the delusion of perception, was the possessor of infinite brilliance like the sun, and was pleasant to look at like the moon. 387-386 || He was peaceful like a restrained person, protected the people like a father, and always engaged in righteous actions for the benefit of both worlds. 360 || Prajnapti, Kamaroopini, Agnistambhini, Udakastambhini, Vishwapravesini, Apratihatagami, Akashagami, Utpardini, Vashikarani, Dashami, Aveshini, Manniya Prasthapini, Pramohini, Praharani, Sankramani, Awartani, Sangrahni, Bhanjani, Vipatini, Pravartani, Pramodini, 
1 Tirthesh: kh. 2 Chapannivina: kh, g. 3 Surya iva. 4 Stuta l.

Page #193:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Festival

**Prahapanī, Prabhāvatī, Pralapaṇī, Nikshepṇī, Sharvarī, Chaṇḍālī, Mātaṅgī, Gaūrī, Shaḍaṅgikā, Śrīmatkanyā, Shatasankulā, Kubhāṇḍī, Viralavegikā, Rohinī, Manovegā, Mahāvegā, Chaṇḍavegā, Chapalavegā, Laghukarī, Parṇalaghu, Vegāvatī, Shītoda, Uṣṇada, Vetālī, Mahājvālā, Sarvavidyāchedinī, Yuddhavīryā, Bandhamochanī, Prahārāvaraṇī, Bhramārī, Abhoginī** etc. were born in various lineages and castes, and they mastered many Vidya (knowledge). Having transcended all these Vidya, he shone like a Yogi. || 361-400 ||

Being the lord of both the lineages, he was the king of all the Vidyadharas. Thus, attaining the position of Chakravartī of the Vidyadharas, he enjoyed for a long time. || 401 ||

One day, the lord of the Vidyadharas, Amitateja, gave food to the Charana (singer) Muni named Damavara, who was endowed with Riddhi (divine powers), according to the proper procedure, and obtained Pancha-āścarya (five wonders). || 402 ||

One day, Amitateja and Śrīvijaya bowed their heads and saluted the two great Munis named Amaraguru and Devaguru. They saw the true nature of Dharma, drank the nectar of their words, and obtained such satisfaction as if they had attained immortality. || 403-404 ||

Thereafter, Śrīvijaya asked about his and his father's past lives. The first Bhagavān Amaraguru, who destroys all sins, said, || 405 ||

"From the time of Viśvanandī's birth, I will tell you the whole story." Hearing this story, Amitateja made a vow to enjoy worldly pleasures. || 406 ||

Amitateja and Śrīvijaya enjoyed the nectar of happiness of the Vidyadharas and the earth-dwellers for some time. Then, hearing that their lifespan was only one month, they gave their kingdom to their sons, Arkateja and Śrīdatta, with great respect. They performed the Ashṭāshika (eight-day) worship, renounced all possessions near the forest of Chandana, where the Muni named Nandana resided, and embraced the Praṇāyopagama Sannyāsa (a type of renunciation). Finally, Amitateja, the king of the Vidyadharas, who was the holder of pure intellect, attained Samadhi-maraṇa (death in meditation) and became the Deva named Ravichūla in the Nandya-vartta Vimana of the thirteenth heaven. Śrīvijaya also became the Deva named Maṇichūla in the Svastika Vimana of the same heaven. Their lifespan there was twenty oceans. After their lifespan ended, they departed from there. || 407-411 ||

1. Sharvarīyā cha La. 2. Prahārācharaṇī La. 3. Munipungavī Ga. 4. Mahātmyaṁ La. 5. Prathamaṁ Ga.

Page #194:
---------------------------
## Chapter 166

In the Jambudvipa, in the country of Vatsakavati, located in the eastern Videha region, in the city of Prabhakari, there lived a king named Stimita-Sagara. His queen was Vasundhara. 

They had a son named Aparajita, who was born from the Nandya-Varta celestial vehicle. 

Another son, named Ananta-Virya, was born to the queen Anumati from the Swastika celestial vehicle. 

Both brothers were adorned with beauty, like the moons of Jambudvipa. Just as the moon is radiant, so were they. Just as the moon delights the blue lotuses, so did they delight the earth. Just as the moon dispels thirst and heat, so did they dispel the suffering of thirst. Just as the moon is the holder of sixteen arts, so were they the possessors of many skills and cleverness. 

Or, they were like the twin suns. Just as the twin suns delight the lotus-like Lakshmi, so did they. Just as the twin suns have radiant bodies, so did they. Just as the twin suns destroy darkness, so did they destroy ignorance. Just as the twin suns rise eternally, so did their prosperity remain constant. Just as the twin suns are the eyes of the world, so were they the eyes of the world. 

They were skilled but never deceitful, powerful but never harmful. They were free from taxes, yet they were generous and noble. They shone brightly. 

They could not be compared to Kamadeva in terms of beauty, for he was bodiless. Nor could they be compared to Guru and Shukra in terms of wisdom, for they were rivals. 

The shadow cast by the sun may decrease or increase, but the shadow cast by these brothers, like the shadow of a growing tree, only increases. 

They never engaged in war, nor did they need any vehicle. Even the powerful kings of the enemy were afraid of their power and sought peace with them.

Page #195:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Chapter

The two brothers, who were the objects of the Queen of Fortune's gaze, were growing like the moon on the eighth day of the bright fortnight, having attained a new age.  || 421 ||

Their father, having renounced his pleasure in worldly enjoyments, thought, "Now my two worthy sons have reached the age to enjoy the kingdom." || 422 ||

Then, calling his two sons, who were like celestial beings, the king, without any desire for himself, crowned one as king and the other as the heir apparent. || 423 ||

He himself, having attained self-control, went to the feet of the Jina, known as "Self-Luminous," and, seeing the prosperity of the king of the earth, he took the vow of non-attachment. || 424 ||

Being tainted by the karma of attachment, he practiced austerities in his youth, desiring worldly pleasures. At the end of his life, with a pure soul, he attained the state of the king of the earth. || 425 ||

"Having attained their positions, they, like seeds and sprouts, grew in prosperity through the watering of the well of good policy." || 426 ||

Just as the rays of the sun, appearing first, establish themselves on the peaks of all mountains, so the rays of their glorious policies, appearing first, established themselves on the heads of all kings. || 427 ||

The two young kings, whose fortune was new, and who were themselves young, were deeply attached to worldly pleasures due to the mutual affection that arose between them. || 428 ||

There were two dancers, named Barbari and Chilatika, who seemed as if the art of dance had taken on two forms. || 429 ||

One day, the two kings were happily watching the dance of these dancers when Narada arrived. || 430 ||

The two brothers were engrossed in watching the dance and did not pay attention to Narada. They were already cruel, and this incident further aggravated their disposition. As they approached the two brothers, they seemed like Rahu approaching the sun and moon. Their minds were burning with the flames of anger. Just as the sun burns in the midday of the month of Jyestha, so Narada was burning with anger. || 431-432 ||

Filled with anger, the lover of discord, Narada, left the assembly and, in a fit of rage, went to the Shiva temple in the city. || 433 ||

Page #196:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, in the assembly of the Dabhitara, the Dabhitara was seated in his own palace. He appeared as if the setting sun was about to fall from the peak of the mountain. Seeing Narada, he quickly rose, welcomed him, bowed to him, and seated him on a high throne. After Narada sat down, having given his blessings, he asked, "What is the purpose of your arrival here? Have you come to give me wealth, or have you come to bestow upon me a great position?" Hearing this, Narada's lotus-like face blossomed. He spoke words that brought joy and increased affection, saying, "O King, I constantly roam around searching for things that are essential for you. Today, I saw two dancers who are worthy of your viewing." He continued, "They are not in the right place, and I am not capable of enduring such an unpleasant situation. That is why I have come to you. Can the position of a jewel on the crown ever be tolerated between the feet?" He said, "At this time, there are no warriors who can fight them. They are arrogant due to their newfound wealth and are falsely claiming to be conquerors. The rulers of Prabhakaripura, Aparajit and Anantviya, are addicted to the seven vices and are careless. The essence of the world, the pair of dancers, resides in their home. You can easily obtain them. By sending a messenger, they will come to you today as a mere act of play. It is not good to waste time when something extremely rare is within reach." Thus, influenced by Narada, who was as sinful as Yama and whose death was imminent, Dabhitara agreed to Narada's request. Hearing about the dancers, his mind was captivated. At that moment, he sent a messenger with gifts to Aparajit and Anantviya, the valiant kings of Vatsakavati, to convey the matter. The messenger, following the king's orders, did not delay even for a day and quickly reached Prabhakaripura. At that time, both brothers were seated in the Jain temple, observing a fast with offerings. Seeing them, the wise minister conveyed the news of his arrival through his words and presented the gifts he had brought, appropriately for both brothers. He said, "The fire of his prowess burns like a blazing ball of divine iron. He burns the messenger who has committed a sin and is arrogant."

Page #197:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Chapter

166. The hearts of those who are naturally enemies of the righteous, upon hearing his name, burst forth. They, filled with fear, become humble and vomit out their hatred and weapons. || 449 ||

For those with pure minds, there are no natural enemies of his. He enjoys his kingdom, dividing it with his lineage and the entire world. || 450 ||

How can there be artificial enemies of this king? For those who do not desire scorn, wear his command like a garland on their heads. || 451 ||

He creates rainbows with the rays of jewels from the crowns of all the Vidyadharas who bow down to him, even to the foot of his throne. || 452 ||

His glory, earned by conquering his enemies, shines like the moon and the jasmine flower. Maidens sing his praises, reaching even the teeth of the elephants. || 453 ||

Just as elephants are tamed by their keepers, so too were great and formidable kings subdued by him. Thus, his name, "Damitar," is a fitting and well-known epithet. || 454 ||

Though his fiery prowess has consumed all his enemies like fuel, his blazing glory, like that of Agni Kumar, continues to burn. || 455 ||

He, the glorious Damitar, has sent me to you, requesting two dancers. For the sake of your happiness, you must give them. || 456 ||

Your dancers are renowned throughout the earth, and thus are worthy of him. By giving them, he will be pleased with you both and bestow good fortune. || 457 ||

Hearing this, the king sent the messenger to rest. Then, summoning his ministers, he asked, "What should we do in this situation?" || 458 ||

Due to their virtuous deeds, the goddesses of the third heaven arrived quickly. Revealing their forms, they said, "We are worthy of being employed by you in your desired work. Do not be troubled in vain." They spoke with great respect. || 459-460 ||

Hearing this, the two brothers entrusted their kingdom to their ministers, donned the attire of dancers, and said to the messenger, "Let us go." || 461 ||

Page #198:
---------------------------
170
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, it is said, "Having spoken with the messenger, they reached the city of Shiva. After discussing the hidden meaning, they entered the king's palace." (462) There they saw the king of the birds, Damitaraka, and he was pleased with them. He spoke to them with peaceful words, honored them, and on the next day, he was very happy and satisfied after seeing their dance, which was full of captivating ornaments, gestures, emotions, and flavors. (463-464) One day he said to them, "O beautiful ones! Teach your art to our daughter." Saying this, he entrusted his daughter, Kanakshri, to them. (465) They took the princess and began to teach her to dance properly. One day they sang a song praising the qualities of the future emperor: (466) "He who has conquered all the kings of the earth with his family strength and other qualities, who makes even Kamadeva ashamed of his body, who is the best in the world, and who is the home of the pleasures and beautiful sights of beautiful women, may Anantavirya, the famous lord of the earth, protect you all." (467) Hearing this song, the princess, whose body was filled with Kamadeva, asked them, "Who is the one being praised? Tell me." (468) They replied, "He is the lord of Prabhakaripuri, born from the ocean of stillness, like a great jewel, he seems to be the jewel on the crown of the kings. He is like a Kalpa tree for the climbing of the creeper of women, and he is adorned with a lotus face fit for the enjoyment of the bees of women." (469-470) Hearing this description of Anantavirya's form, beauty, and other qualities, the daughter of the Vidhyadhara, Kanakshri, whose joy doubled, said, "Can he be seen?" They replied, "O daughter! You can see him well. Indeed, you have seen his form directly." (472)

Page #199:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Second Chapter

Seeing the love-sick Kankashri, the two dancers, taking her with them, went on the path of the winds. || 473 || Hearing this from the inner-palace officials, the lord of the Vidyadharas, Damitarin, sent his soldiers to bring them back. || 474 || Seeing the arrival of the soldiers, Balabhadra, the strong one, kept his younger brother and the girl far away and, returning himself, fought. || 475 || Fighting for a long time, Balabhadra sent those soldiers to Yama. Then, enraged, Damitarin ordered his other warriors, capable of fighting. || 476 || Like mountains sinking in the ocean, those warriors too, sank in the vast waters of Balabhadra's sword. Hearing this, Damitarin was astonished. || 477 || Calling his ministers, he said, "This effect cannot be of the dancers. What is the truth? Tell me." Knowing the truth themselves, the ministers informed the king. || 478 || Then, like a fire fueled by wood, or the anger of a lion, Damitarin, enraged, set out to fight himself, with his army. || 479 || But Balabhadra, alone, with his knowledge and prowess, killed all of them, leaving only Damitarin. || 480 || Like a lion attacking a maddened elephant, seeing Damitarin, like Yama, coming to kill his elder brother, Anantvirya attacked him. || 481 || Fighting in many ways, the more powerful Anantvirya, with his knowledge and strength, subdued the arrogant Damitarin, making him motionless. || 482 || Then, Damitarin, the king of the Vidyadharas, picked up a discus and threw it at Anantvirya. But the discus, circumambulating him, stopped near his right shoulder. || 483 || Just as a yogi destroys death with the Dharmachakra, so too, the powerful future Narayana destroyed Damitarin with the same discus. || 484 || Thus, the battle ended. As the two brothers were going through the sky, their chariot suddenly stopped, as if fearing the transgression of the revered ones. || 485 || Thinking, "This chariot has been nailed by someone, or it is not going forward due to some other reason," they both looked around. Looking around, they saw the Samavasarana... || 486 ||

Page #200:
---------------------------
172
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, there are these four things: the Manastambhas, the lakes, the forests, and the Gandhakuti. In the middle of them, there is a Jina, a Tirthankara. || 187 || Thus, Anantavirya and his brother Baldeva descended there. They learned that this Jina was the lord of the city of Shiva Mandir, the son of King Kanakapunkha and Queen Jayadevi, the father of Damitar, and his name was Kirtidhara. He had renounced the world and taken the Parameshwari initiation from the Shantikaran Muni. After observing the Pratimāyoga for a year, he attained Kevala Jnana, and Indra and other gods worshipped him with great devotion. || 188 || Saying this, both brothers circumambulated the Jina three times, bowed down repeatedly, listened to the Dharmakatha, and both brothers sat there, having destroyed their sins. || 449 || Kanakshri also went with them. She bowed down to her grandfather with devotion and asked the Jina, the destroyer of evil deeds, about her future births. || 491 || Asked thus, the Jina, whose words are like nectar, said to her, "To benefit others is the sole fruit of my actions." || 492 || In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharata Kshetra, there was a city called Shankha. In it, there was a Vaishya named Devila. He had a wife named Bandhashri, and from her, he had a daughter named Shridatta, who was elder and virtuous. You had other younger sisters who were leprous, lame, hunchbacked, deaf, crippled, blind, and lame. You yourself took care of all of them. Once, you worshipped the Sarvayash Muni, who resided on the Sarvashila mountain, attained peace, took the vow of non-violence, and purified your mind by observing the Dharmachakra fast. || 493 || On another day, you gave food to an Aryika named Suvrata, according to the prescribed rituals. The Aryika had fasted earlier, so after taking food, she vomited. Because you did not have Samyak Darshan, you felt disgusted with the Aryika. Due to the merit of the vow of non-violence and the fast that you observed, you died at the end of your life and became a goddess of the Saumya heaven, in the Samanika caste. From there, you were born as the daughter of King Damitar, named Kanakshri, from his wife Mandaramalini. The result of your disgust towards the Aryika is that these people killed your strong father and forcibly brought you here, and you suffered. This is why wise people never || 494 ||

Page #201:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Second Festival
173

The daughter of the Vidyadhara, overwhelmed with grief, bowed to the Niryana and, accompanied by Prabhakari, went to the city of Prabhakari.  

The two brothers, Sughoṣa and Vidyuiṣṭra, known for their golden radiance, were engaged in battle with Ananta-sena, sent by Narayana and Balabhadra, in the city of Shiva-mandir.  

Seeing this, Balabhadra and Narayana, filled with righteous anger, bound the two brothers.  

Hearing this, Kanakabhi, unable to bear the sorrow, became like the moon, whose radiance is diminished and weakened by the rising sun, her strength waning without the support of her brothers.  

Withered by the fire of grief, she became like a vine, her desires for worldly pleasures extinguished, her only concern the suffering of her brothers.  

Understanding their plight, she pleaded with Balabhadra and Narayana, freeing her brothers.  She then partook of the nectar of Dharma from the Tirthankara, Svayam-prabha, and, initiated by the Ganini, Su-prabha, attained liberation at the end of her life, becoming a deity in the Saudharma heaven.  Such is the wondrous nature of karma.  

The two brothers, Harini, who had devised great strategies, possessed immense strength and abundant merit, praised by the wise, initiating only virtuous deeds, united in their purpose, having vanquished their enemies, their souls at peace, their actions guided by righteousness, entered the city together, amidst great celebrations.  

The one who embodies unshakeable peace, the undefeated, having conquered the renowned Vidyadharas, attained the position of the lord of the Vidyadharas and the position of Balabhadra, thus establishing his name as undefeated, not only in name but also in essence.  

The power of the enemy...
1.  Hearing this, the daughter of the Vidyadhara...
2.  The daughter of the Vidyadhara, like the moon...
3.  Having vanquished the enemy...

Page #202:
---------------------------
## Chapter 62: The Rise of Aparajita and Anantavirya

**174**

**Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

Anantavirya, who conquered the sun with his might, was the most valiant among the valiant, and he was the best on earth. (511)

He, who always followed the power of the mantras, played like a lion, and with the flames of his blazing glory, he burnt down the forests of his enemies' lineage. He is the foremost among all the Narayanas. The enemy who provokes him is instantly consumed by the burning flames of Yama, and is seen to be enveloped in them. (512)

He, whose path is always guided by his elder brother, whose enemies' clouds have been destroyed, who has attained purity through the grace of time, and whose brilliance has filled the entire universe, resides in his city like the sun in autumn, with his fierce radiance. (513)

Thus ends the sixty-second chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which narrates the rise of Aparajita and Anantavirya Narayana.

**1** Sadal.

Page #203:
---------------------------
## The Triṣaṣṭititamaṁ Parva

The Ardhacakri-Narayana, adorned with six segments, sat upon a throne, his body radiating an aura of infinite power. He was as resplendent as a fully adorned Chakravarti. ||1||

Similarly, the Aparajita, the lord of jewels and other treasures, had attained the position of Balabhadra and was growing in power every day. ||2||

Time passed for these two brothers, their love for each other, born in previous lives, ever-increasing, and their enjoyment of unfettered, supreme happiness, uninterrupted. ||3||

From the victory of Halesha, a daughter named Sumati was born. She delighted everyone, like the moonlight of the waxing moon. ||4||

She grew day by day, her virtues increasing, and she brought joy to her parents, fulfilling their desire for a daughter who would be the beloved of the earth. ||5||

One day, King Aparajita gave food and alms to a Carana named Damvara, a sage with great powers, and received five wonders. At that time, he saw his daughter and thought, "She is not only adorned with beauty, but also with youth. Now, she seeks the shelter of the god of time, and is ready for marriage." ||6-7||

Thinking thus, the two brothers announced the Swayamvara, and built a hall for the event, inviting all the best men. ||8||

They placed their daughter on a chariot and sent her to the Swayamvara hall, while they themselves sat there. After some time, a goddess arrived in a celestial chariot, and said to Sumati, "Do you remember, daughter, that we were both celestial beings? We made a vow then, that the one who would be born first on earth would guide the other. I am here to tell you about your past lives and your connection to this one. Listen with a steady mind." ||9-11||

"In the city of Nandana, in the land of Bharata, on the eastern half of the Pushkara island, there reigned a king named Amitavikrama, renowned for his strength and prowess. His queen, Anandamati, gave birth to you and me. We were both blessed with immense wealth and prosperity, and we were both loved by the lord of Nandana, who resides on the Siddhakūta mountain." ||12-13||

Page #204:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, 
Having heard about Dharma and vows, along with fasts, 
Seeing the nine auspicious things together, 
The lord of Tripura, Vajrangad, perhaps... (14) 
Went to the beautiful forest, along with his wife Vajramalini, 
His mind was attached to her beauty. (15) 
He reached the city and sent his beloved wife back, 
He quickly returned, taking her, intending to go to his own place. (16) 
Seeing Vajramalini coming from afar, 
He left them both in the bamboo forest out of fear, and went to his own city. (17) 
We both renounced the world there, 
With pure intellect, I became the ninth goddess of Saudharmendra, 
Through the merit of vows and fasts, 
And you became the goddess Rati of Kubera. (18) 
Recognizing each other, we went to the great Mahāmahā Yajña in Nandishvara. (19) 
Then, we went to the forest near Mount Mandara, devoid of any living beings, 
And took refuge in the Charana Muni, Dhritiṣeṇa, and bowed to him. (20) 
We asked him, "When will we attain liberation?" 
The Muni replied, "In the fourth birth from this one, 
Your liberation is certain. 
O wise Sumati, I have come from the world of the gods to enlighten you." (21-22) 
Hearing this, Sumati, making her name meaningful, 
Took leave from her father and was initiated by Suvrata, 
Along with seven hundred maidens. (23) 
After initiation, she performed severe austerities, 
And at the end of her life, she died and became a deity in the celestial chariot of the thirteenth heaven, Ananta. (24) 
Anantavirya Narayana ruled over the three realms with various pleasures, 
And finally, due to the accumulation of sins, he went to the first earth, Ratnaprabha. (25) 
Balabhadra, the undefeated, was deeply saddened by this, 
But when he regained his composure, he gave the kingdom to his son Ananta Sena, 
And took initiation from the Muni Yaso dhara. (26) 
He attained the third stage of knowledge, 
And after a thirty-day renunciation, he became the lord of Acyuta heaven. (27) 
Having learned from his father, Dharanendra, 
He obtained the jewel of right faith, 
And after a certain number of years, he was freed from the hell of evil deeds. (28)

Page #205:
---------------------------
## The Trishatitam Parva

In this island of Bharat, where the celestial beings rest in their ranks, there lived a Vidyadhara king named Meghavahana, the lord of the sky, in the city of Gaganavallabha.  || 29 ||

His queen, Meghamalini, bore him a son named Meghanaada, the lord of birds. He ruled over two ranks and enjoyed pleasures for a long time. || 30 ||

Once, while Meghanaada was perfecting his knowledge in the Nandana forest on Mount Meru, he was enlightened by the liberated soul, Achyutesha. || 31 ||

Having attained enlightenment, he took refuge in the great sage, Suramaraguru, and followed the excellent secrets and assemblies for a long time. || 32 ||

One day, this same sage was residing on Mount Nandana, practicing the image yoga.  Meanwhile, Sukantha, the younger brother of Ashvagriva, had wandered through the ocean of existence for a long time and attained the state of an Asura. He emerged from there and, upon seeing the great sage, was filled with anger and inflicted various kinds of torments. || 33-34 ||

However, this wicked being was unable to even slightly shake the firm vows of the sage.  He disappeared, as if hidden by a veil of shame. || 35 ||

The sage, having renounced worldly life, became the chief of the celestial beings in Achyuta heaven at the end of his life. He enjoyed the pleasures of the celestial realm with Indra, with whom he had great affection. || 36 ||

The liberated soul who had become Indra was previously born in the eastern Videha region of this Jambudvipa, in the city of Ratnasamchaya. He was born as the son of King Kshemakara and his queen, Kanakachitra, a virtuous and intelligent being, shining like lightning in the clouds.  || 37-38 ||

At his birth, actions like Aadhāna, Preeti, Supreeti, Dhriti, Moh, and Priyodhbhava were performed. || 39 ||

His birth brought great joy to everyone, just like his mother.  Indeed, what is the light of the sun but a reflection of its own essence? || 40 ||

His body grew with all its beauty and splendor.  Just as a god is adorned with natural ornaments, he was adorned with natural virtues. || 41 ||

Anankhaviyaka, a Jiva, was a resident of the hell called Marakara Dharanendra. He went to hell and explained to Anantvirya, who, upon understanding, attained the jewel of Samyagdarshan. After completing his allotted lifespan, he was released from hell due to the diminishing of his sins. He was born as the son of Meghamalini, the queen of Meghavahana, the Vidyadhara king of Gaganavallabha, a famous city in the northern range of Mount Vijaya in the Bharat region of Jambudvipa. He ruled over both ranks and enjoyed pleasures for a long time. || 28-30 ||

Page #206:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the people's affection for him arose even before his birth. It was like the dawn's redness, a sign of the great rising of the sun. ||42|| His fame, spreading widely, filled everyone with confidence. It was like the spreading of the seed of the Kash tree, reassuring the people. ||43|| Like the moon, adorned with radiance and moonlight in the bright fortnight, he, Vajrayudha, was adorned with the kingdom's fortune and Lakshmi, his wife, in his youthful prime. ||44|| From him and Lakshmi, a son was born, named Sahasrayudha, whose strength was like that of Indra. He was like the sun, shining brightly in the east, a beacon of righteousness. ||45|| Sahasrayudha had a son named Kanakashanta, born to his wife, Shrishena. Thus, Kshemakara, surrounded by his sons, grandsons, and other family members, ruled. ||46|| His power was unmatched, and many kings bowed before him. One day, he was seated on his throne, with chowries waving over him. ||47|| At that time, in the assembly of the gods, the lord of the heavens, Ishana, praised Vajrayudha, saying, "Vajrayudha is highly virtuous, possessing great knowledge of the Mahavira's teachings." ||48|| The god, named Vichitracula, could not bear this praise. To test Vajrayudha, he went to him. This is natural, for the wicked cannot tolerate the praise of others. ||49|| He assumed a different form and appeared before the king, as was appropriate. Then, itching for a debate, he took refuge in the Sautrantika doctrine and said, ||50|| "O King! You are wise in the contemplation of jivas and other things. Tell me, is a synonym different from the thing it signifies, or is it the same?" ||51|| "If a synonym is different from the thing it signifies, then it leads to emptiness, for both lack a separate basis. And there would be no way to say, 'This is the synonym,' and 'This is the thing it signifies.' Therefore, this view is not tenable." ||52|| "If a synonym and the thing it signifies are considered the same, that too is not logical, because the combination of sameness and difference leads to a contradiction." ||53|| "If, as you believe, the substance is one and the synonyms are many, then both are of the same nature. This assertion would be refuted." ||54|| "If both the substance and the synonym are eternal, then, due to their eternal nature, there would be no arising of karmas like punya and papa. Without the arising of karmas, there would be no bondage, and without bondage, there would be no possibility of liberation." ||55||

Page #207:
---------------------------
## Triṣaṣṭitāma Parva 176

**56.** If you accept the momentariness of both (the individual and the stream of existence), then your position will be abandoned and my position will be established.

**57.** Therefore, O Bhadra, your view is fabricated by the low-minded Buddhists, and it is merely a figment of imagination. Do not waste your effort on it.

**58.** Hearing this well-spoken argument, the wise Vajrayudha said, "O Saugata, listen carefully, with your mind elevated and having attained equanimity."

**59.** The fault you have pointed out, based on the false view of momentary annihilation, cannot harm those who drink the nectar of Syādvāda, which flows from the mouth of the Jina, the moon-like embodiment of truth.

**60.** Because of the difference in designation, name, intellect, and other signs, there is a difference between dharma and dharmin (the principle and the possessor of the principle), and because of the reliance on the principle of non-duality, there is also unity.

**61.** According to the principle of substance and attribute, there is non-duality between the individual and the stream of existence, or between the momentary and the continuous, but according to the principle of practical reality, there is duality.

**62.** The stream of existence, which exists in the three times (past, present, and future), is considered to be an unbroken continuity because of the cause-and-effect relationship between the skandhas (aggregates).

**63.** Even though the skandhas are momentary, the karmic effect of the stream of existence remains. When this effect remains, the enjoyment of its fruits is also established in our view.

**64.** This refutation is like trying to tie a wild elephant with a castor oil plant. It cannot protect your position.

**65.** We ask, is the stream of existence, which arises from the skandhas, different from or non-different from the individual? If it is different, why do we not see it as separate from the individual? Since we do not see it as separate, it is not different from the individual.

**66.** If you accept your fabricated stream of existence as non-different from the individual, then even the Buddha cannot prevent its emptiness. Because the individual is momentary, the stream of existence, which is non-different from it, is also momentary.

Page #208:
---------------------------
180
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the moment that has passed is gone, the moment that is to come has not yet arisen, and the present moment is all-pervasive in its own nature. Therefore, it is not possible for a child to be born from these three moments. If there is a fourth moment besides these, then a child could be born from it. But you do not accept a fourth moment, because accepting a fourth moment would require accepting the existence of the three moments, which would negate the theory of momentariness. Thus, your theory of a child being born seems to be the source of the sorrows of the world. 66-68.

When the god considered that his words had been shattered by the words of Vajrayudha, his entire pride was destroyed. At that moment, due to the favorable conditions of time and other attainments, he attained right faith. He worshipped the king, told him the story of his arrival, and then went to heaven. 66-70.

Then, Kshemakara, the king, continued to rule the earth, harmonizing yoga and welfare. After a long time, he attained self-knowledge, free from the obscurations of the mind. 72.

He performed the coronation of Vajrayudha Kumar, received praise from the gods of the world, and left home to take initiation. 72.

He practiced the scriptures continuously and performed austerities of many kinds for a long time. While performing austerities, he did not wear any kind of covering, did not reside in any particular place, never became negligent, never violated the order of the scriptures, did not keep any possessions, renounced food by observing long fasts, did not wear any ornaments, never engaged in passions, did not begin anything, did not commit any sins, and never broke his vows. He made his mind free from attachment, ego, deceit, controlled his senses, free from anger, free from fickleness, and pure, in order to attain liberation. 73-75.

Gradually, he also attained perfect knowledge. Indra and other gods came to his festival of glory and well-being, and he satisfied his twelve assemblies with divine sounds. 76.

Meanwhile, King Vajrayudha ruled the earth, which was flourishing due to good deeds. Gradually, the month of Chaitra, which increases the madness of desire, arrived. The sweet chirping of cuckoos and the sweet humming of bees, like the spells of Kamadeva, began to take the lives of women who were separated from their lovers. All kinds of flowers

Page #209:
---------------------------
The Trishatitima Parva

181. The forests, laden with flowers, seemed to be offering their all to the conqueror of the three worlds, Kamadeva. 79. At that time, knowing from the mouth of Sudarshana and the eagerness of his wives, Dharini and others, the king desired to go to the Devaramana forest. 80. Going to the forest, he began to play in the water of the Sudarshana lake with his queens. 81. Suddenly, a wicked Vidyaadhara covered the lake with a stone and bound the king with a serpent's noose. 82. The king, Vayudhana, struck the stone with the palm of his hand, shattering it into a hundred pieces. 83. The wicked Vidyaadhara fled at that moment. 84. This was none other than the enemy from a previous life, Vidyun-dastra. Vayudhana returned to his city with his queens. 85. Thus, the king's time passed happily due to his virtuous deeds. Nine treasures and fourteen gems appeared. 86. Having attained the glory of a Chakravarti, he was seated on his throne when a frightened Vidyaadhara sought his refuge. 87. Behind him came a Vidyaadhari, holding a sword in her hand, illuminating the assembly ground like a flame of fire. 88. Behind her came an old Vidyaadhara, holding a mace in his hand, and said, "O Maharaj! This Vidyaadhara is a wicked, low-born creature. You are always vigilant in suppressing the wicked and protecting the righteous. Therefore, you must surely punish this wrongdoer." 89. "If you wish to know what wrong he has done, O Dev! I will tell you. Listen with your mind fixed." 90. "In the Sukkacha region of Jambudvipa, on the northern range of the Vijayardha mountain, there is a city called Shukra-prabha. 91. There, the king of the Vidyaadharas, Indradatta, rules. His queen is named Yashodhara. 92. I am their son, Vayuvega, and I am respected by all the Vidyaadharas. 93. In the same region, there is a city called Kinnarageeta. Its king is named Chitra-chula. 94. Chitra-chula's daughter, Sukanta, was my beloved."

Page #210:
---------------------------
182
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Suta, this peaceful and virtuous woman, the daughter of Sukaanta, went to the Munisagar mountain to attain knowledge. ||14||
A sinner appeared there to obstruct her attainment of knowledge, but due to the rise of her virtuous deeds, her knowledge was attained. ||15||
This sinner, fearing the power of knowledge, sought your refuge. I, carrying the offerings for the worship of knowledge, arrived there at the same time. ||16||
Not seeing my daughter there, I quickly followed the same path. Thus spoke the old Vidhyadhara. Hearing all this, the king Vajrayudha, who possessed the eyes of knowledge, said, "I know the great cause of the obstruction in her knowledge." Saying this, he clearly narrated the story. ||17-18||
In this well-known Airavata region of Jambudvipa, there was a country called Gandhara. In its city of Vindhyapura, a king named Vindhyasena, adorned with virtues, ruled. ||19||
He had a son named Nalinaketu, born to his beautiful queen. In the same city, there lived a merchant named Dhanamitra. ||20||
He had a son named Sudatta, born to his wife, Shridatta. Sudatta's wife was named Preetikara. One day, Preetikara was wandering in a forest. ||21||
At that time, Prince Nalinaketu saw her and was consumed by the fire of lust. Unable to bear the burning desire, he, driven by evil thoughts, violated the law and forcibly abducted Preetikara. ||22-23||
Sudatta, deeply distressed by this incident, took initiation from the Jina named Suvrata. He performed severe austerities for a long time and, at the end of his life, renounced the world. ||24||
He became a god in the Aishana heaven, with the lifespan of a Sagar. After enjoying pleasures there for a long time, he was reborn as a virtuous being. ||25||
He was born in the city of Kanchanatilaka, located in the northern range of the Vijayardha mountain, in the Sukkacha region of Jambudvipa. ||26||
He was born as the beloved son of King Mahendravikrama and Queen Neelavega, named Ajit Sena. He was invincible in knowledge and prowess. ||27-28||
Meanwhile, Nalinaketu, witnessing a meteor shower, attained self-knowledge. He renounced his past evil deeds and, seeking refuge in the Muni Simankara, took initiation. ||29||
He purified his mind, gradually attained the state of Kevalgyan, and finally achieved the eighth stage of liberation, Moksha. ||30-31||

Page #211:
---------------------------
The Trishatitam Perv
183.  Preetikara, being detached, went to Suvrata's house and, renouncing her home and possessions, performed the great Chandrayana penance. 109.  At the end, she attained the state of a Sannyasini and became a goddess in the Aishana heaven. 110.  There, she completed her lifespan through divine enjoyments and was then reborn. 111.  "Your daughter has been born," it was said. "This is a hindrance to knowledge. It is said that everything is due to past connections."  Hearing this, the king, Vajrayudha, 111.  became detached from the world and, seeking peace, went to the Tirthankara Kshemakar.  There, she quickly attained the status of an Aryika, having received the Dharma. 112.  She embraced restraint, renounced the world, and became a goddess in the Aishana heaven. 113.  She came to worship her own body.  At that time, Pavanavega and Ajit Sena attained Kevalgyan.  She worshipped them and then returned to her own place. 114.  Thus, the Chakravartin, whose body is embraced by Rajyalakshmi, the goddess of fortune, rules over the six continents, being subject to the ten types of enjoyments. 115.  In the southern part of the Vijayadhara mountain, in the city of Shiva Mandir, King Meghavahana ruled.  His wife's name was Vimala. 116.  They had a daughter named Kanakmala.  Many celebrations were held at her birth.  When she grew up, she became the wife of King Kanakshanti, bringing him pleasure. 117.  Besides this, Vasantasena, born to Queen Jayasena, the wife of the Vidhyadhara, the ruler of the city of Vastvoksara, was the younger wife of Kanakshanti. 118.  Just as one attains liberation through right vision and right conduct, so too did Kanakshanti attain happiness through these two wives. 119.  One day, Kanakshanti, as if called by the first songs of the cuckoos, went out to the forest with his wives, filled with joy. 120.  Just as one who searches for roots, fruits, and tubers finds treasure through good deeds, so too did the prince see the Muni, Vimala Prabha, in the forest. 121.  He circumambulated him three times, worshipped him, and received knowledge of the truth.  He then cleansed his mind of its impurities and devoted himself to the Buddha. 122.  At that time, Diksha Lakshmi brought him under her control, meaning he took initiation.  Therefore, it is said that Vasantalakshmi was like the messenger of Tapas Lakshmi.  Meaning: Just as a messenger brings a man together with a woman, 
1.  Preetikaraatinivegat, K.  Preetikaraapi sanvegat, M., L.
2.  Tadaajani, M.
3.  Vastvoksaraakhya, K., G., 10, Vastvoka, M.
4.  Kokilprama, K., Kh., Gh.
5.  Tapashriyam, K., 10.

Page #212:
---------------------------
## Chapter 184, Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

124. The two wives of Kanakshanti Muni, having taken refuge in the Aryika Vimala Mati, were initiated. This is fitting, for women of noble lineage should do so.

125. Once, while Kanakshanti Muni was residing at Siddhachal, adorned with the image-yoga, a Vidyadhara named Chitra Chula, the brother of Vasanta Sena, arrived. Due to a past life enmity, his eyes were red with anger. He was about to initiate an attack, but the lord of the Vidyadharas rebuked him and drove him away.

126. On another occasion, King Ratna Sena of Ratnapur, offered food and received the five wonders from Kanakshanti Muni, for the sake of Kanakshanti's peace.

127. Again, while the Muni was residing at the forest called Sur Nipata, adorned with the image-yoga, the Vidyadhara Chitra Chula was ready to cause harm.

128. But the Muni, abandoning anger, destroyed the harmful karma and attained Kevala Jnana. This is fitting, for the wise do not harbor anger.

129. Seeing the arrival of the gods to celebrate the attainment of Kevala Jnana, the sinful Vidyadhara, filled with fear, sought refuge in the same Kevali Bhagavan. This is the nature of the lowly.

130. Then, seeing the celebration of his grandson's attainment of Kevala Jnana, King Vajrayudha also attained self-knowledge. He gave his kingdom to Sahasrayudha and, approaching the Tirthankara Kshemankara, took initiation. After initiation, he resided on the mountain Siddhigiri, adorned with the image-yoga for a year.

131. Many great souls, taking refuge in his feet, flourished. This is fitting, for even enemies who touch the feet of a great soul are elevated.

132. Even the creepers, firmly rooted around his body, seemed to reach out to the Muni, seeking the softness of his virtues.

133. The two sons of Ashvagriva, Ratnakantha and Ratnayudha, wandered in the world for a long time and became the Asuras Atibala and Mahabala. Driven by a desire to harm the Muni, they went to him. But the goddesses Rambha and Tilottama saw them, rebuked them, and drove them away. With great devotion, they worshipped him with divine fragrance and other offerings. After the worship, the goddesses returned to heaven. See, how two women...

Page #213:
---------------------------
## The Trishatitam Parva

**Chapter 137**

The divine beings, with their fragrant offerings, worshipped the Jina. Who could not achieve their desires in the presence of such merit?

**Chapter 138**

For some reason, the son of Vajrayudha, Sahasrayudha, renounced his kingdom, giving it to Shatabali. He relinquished all desires and, seeking the highest restraint, approached the Muni, Pihitashrava.

**Chapter 139**

After a year of intense yoga, he reached his father, the Muni Vajrayudha.

**Chapter 140**

Both father and son, for a long time, endured the hardships of asceticism. Finally, they reached the peak of the Vaibhara mountain. There, they renounced their attachment to the body, embracing the life of a renunciant.

**Chapter 141**

They ascended to the celestial vehicle, Saumanasa, situated below the Urdhvaivaiyaka. They became great beings of immense power, their lifespan spanning twenty-nine oceans.

**Chapter 142**

Vajrayudha, having transmigrated, was reborn in the Pushkalavati region of the eastern Videha, in the city of Pundarikinī.

**Chapter 143**

The king of this city was Dhanarath, and his beautiful queen was Manohara. Vajrayudha, having descended from the Graiveyaka, was reborn as their son, named MeghaRath. His conception and birth were preceded by the necessary rituals.

**Chapter 144**

King Dhanarath had another queen, Manorama. From her womb, Sahasrayudha was reborn as their son, Dridharath. Both sons were as radiant as the moon and the sun.

**Chapter 145**

Both sons possessed remarkable qualities: courage, intelligence, humility, influence, forgiveness, truthfulness, renunciation, and many more.

**Chapter 146**

Both sons reached the peak of youth, resplendent like elephants in their prime. Seeing this, the king, mindful of tradition, decided to arrange their marriages.

**Chapter 147**

He married his elder son to Priyamitra and Manorama, and his younger son to Suमति, who was known as Chitravallbha.

**Chapter 148**

MeghaRath had a son named Nandivardhana from his wife Priyamitra. Dridharath had a son named Varasen from his wife Suमति.

**Chapter 149**

Thus, King Dhanarath, surrounded by the joys of his sons, grandsons, and other descendants, sat on his throne, emulating the divine play of Indra.

**Chapter 150**

At that time, Priyamitra's maid, Sushena, brought a rooster named Ghanatunda and declared, "If anyone's rooster can defeat this one, I will give them a thousand dinars."

**Chapter 151**

Hearing this, the maid of the younger queen, Kana, brought a rooster named Vajratunda. The two roosters were set to fight.

**Chapter 152**

Where are those Asuras now? Even though they chased away those women, it is alright, because what cannot be achieved in the presence of merit?

Page #214:
---------------------------
186
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that both the roosters were the cause of suffering for each other, and for those who witnessed it, the sight of their violence and joy in it was not fit for the eyes of the righteous. ||150-153|| Thinking this, to bring peace to many noble beings and to reveal the greatness of his son, King Ghana-ratha, seeing the battle of the two angry roosters, asked Megha-ratha, "Where did this strength in them come from?" ||154-155|| Thus, asked by Ghana-ratha, Megha-ratha, who possessed pure knowledge, explained the cause of their battle. ||156|| He began by saying, "In this Jambudvipa, in the region of Airavata, there is a city called Ratnapur. In it, there were two brothers, Bhadra and Dhanya. Both were cart drivers. One day, they fought over a bull on the banks of the river Sri and killed each other. Due to their past karma, they were reborn as wild elephants named Shvetakarn and Tamrakarn on the banks of the river Kanchana. There too, they fought and died due to the anger they carried from their previous lives." ||157-158|| "After death, they were reborn as two excellent bulls in the herd of a cowherd named Nandimitra, who lived in the city of Ayodhya. ||160|| Both were arrogant and thus, they became very angry with each other and fought for a long time, until their lives were taken by the blows of their horns." ||161|| "This time, they were reborn as rams named Sena and Shabdavara-sena, sons of the king of Ayodhya. Their heads were as strong as rocks. They fought each other and died, becoming these roosters. Two Vidya-dhara, skilled in their respective arts, are secretly making them fight." ||162-163|| "What is the reason for their fighting? And who are these Vidya-dhara? O King, if you wish to know, listen. In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat-kshetra, on the northern range of the Vijayardha mountain, there is a city called Kanakpur. In it, a king named Garuda-vega ruled. His wife's name was Dhriti-shana. They had two sons, Divit-ilaka and Chandra-tilaka. One day, both sons went to the pair of Charanas who were seated on the Siddha-kuta." ||164-166|| "They praised them and with great humility, asked about their past lives. The elder Muni, speaking in detail, said..." ||167||
1.  Nadee-tirthe kha. Gopal.

Page #215:
---------------------------
The Trishashtitama Parva

168. In the eastern part of the Dhātakīkhaṇḍa region, there is a city named Airavata. Its ruler was Abhayaghoṣa, whose consort was Suvarṇatilakā. They had two sons named Vijaya and Jayanta, who were endowed with excellent conduct and valor.

169. In the southern range of the Vijayārḍha mountain, there was a city named Mandāra, whose ruler was Śaṅkha and his queen was Jayadevī. They had a daughter named Pṛthvītilakā.

170. This Pṛthvītilakā became the beloved of Abhayaghoṣa. Absorbed in her, Abhayaghoṣa stayed with her for one year.

171-173. One day, a maidservant named Cañcatkāntitilakā came and told the king that Queen Suvarṇatilakā wished to go for a forest excursion with him. Hearing the maidservant's words, the king wished to go, but Pṛthvītilakā spoke sweet words and said that she would show him the beautiful forest right there. Saying this, she displayed all the forest objects of that time, and thus was able to restrain the king.

174-175. Suvarṇatilakā, distressed by this insult to her dignity, ultimately took dīkṣā (monastic vows) under the Ārya Sumatī, as this leads to the welfare and spiritual progress of the nearby souls.

176-177. Once, the king Abhayaghoṣa, out of devotion, gave a donation to the Muni Damavara and attained the Pañcāścarya (five wonders). One day, he went to the presence of the Guru Ananta along with his two sons, where he attained self-knowledge and took up the difficult Mahāvrata (great vow).

178. Contemplating on the sixteen causes that are the basis of the Tīrthaṅkara-nāma-karma, and worshiping the Acyuta heaven with his two sons at the end of his life, he attained liberation.

179-180. After enjoying the desired pleasures for twenty-two Sāgaras (cosmic time periods), the three of them (Abhayaghoṣa, Vijaya, and Jayanta) fell from there and were born as the prince Vijaya and Jayanta.

Hearing this, they (Vijaya and Jayanta) asked the Muni, "Where is our father now?" The Muni then narrated the further story.

Page #216:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, the Uttara Purana
Then, hearing all this from Megha-ratha, those two celestial beings, filled with love, came there. Having revealed their forms, they worshipped the king, Ghana-ratha, and the prince, Megha-ratha, and then, going to the end of Govardhana, they attained the perfection of initiation. 
Knowing their connection from their previous births, those two cocks, abandoning their mutual hatred, renounced the world with courage. 
They became the two Vyantaras, Tamra-chula and Kanaka-chula, born of the Bhuta-jati, in the two forests, Bhuta-raman and Deva-raman. 
Then, those two Devas came to the city of  Pundarika-ni, and with great love, worshipped Megha-ratha, and clearly explained their connection from their previous births. 
Finally, they said, "You have seen the entire world, existing within the Manushottara mountain. This is the least we can do for you." 
When the Devas said this, the prince, accepting their words, said, "So be it." Then, the Devas, along with his loved ones, placed the prince on a chariot adorned with many riches, and taking him to the sky, adorned with clouds, showed him the beautiful lands, one after another. 
They said, "This is the first land, Bharat. This is the land of Himavat, beyond it. This is the land of Hari-varsha. This is the land of Videha. This is the fifth land, Ramya. This is the land of Hairanya-vat. And this is the land of Airavat. Thus, O Lord, these are the seven lands, divided by seven Kula-achalas." 
"Himavan, Maha-himavan, Nishdha, Maha-meru, Nila, Rukmi, and Shikhari, these are the seven famous Kula-achalas." 
"These are the fourteen great rivers, flowing towards the ocean, originating from the lakes like Padma, and adorned with many tributaries." 
"Ganga, Sindhu, Rohit, Rohitasy, Harit, Hari-kanta, Sita, Sito-da, Nari, Naraka-kanta, Suvarna-kula, Rupya-kula, Rakta, and Rakto-da, these are their names." 
"Look, these are the sixteen lakes, adorned with lotuses. Padma, Maha-padma, Tigavchha, Kesari, Maha-pundarika, Pundarika, Nishdha, Deva-kuru, Surya, the tenth, Sulasa, Vidyut-prabha, Nilavan, Uttara-kuru, Chandra, Airavat, and Malya-van, these are the names of those sixteen lakes." 
"In the first six of these, reside Sri,

Page #217:
---------------------------
## Triṣaṣṭitiṃ Parva

**Safari**

186 Nāgas reside in the remaining ten abodes, bearing the same names. O Great One, behold these worthy Vaksāra mountains!

**201**

Citrakūṭa, Padmakūṭa, Nalinakūṭa, Ekaśaila, Trikūṭa, Vaiśravaṇakūṭa, Anjanātmā, Anjana, Śraddhāvān, Vijayāvatī, Āśīviṣa, Sukhāvah, Candramāla, Sūryamāla, Nāgamāla, and Devamāla - these are their sixteen names. Besides these, there are four Gaja-danta: Gandhamādana, Mālyavān, Vidyutprabha, and Saumanasya. All these mountains are beyond birth and destruction - they are eternal. Here are the Vibhaṅga rivers, filled with pure water.

**202-205**

Hṛda, Hṛdavatī, Paṅkavati, Saptajala, Mattajala, Unmattajala, Kṣīroda, Śītoda, Sroto'ntarvāhinī, Gandhamālinī, Phenamālinī, and Ūrmimālinī - these are their twelve names.

**206-207**

O Kumar, behold clearly: Kaccha, Sukaccha, Mahākaccha, Kacchakāvatī, Āvartā, Lāṅgalā, Puṣkalā, Puṣkalāvatī, Vatsā, Suvatsā, Mahāvatsā, Vatsakāvatī, Ramyā, Ramyakā, Ramaṇīyā, Maṅgalāvatī, Padma, Supaḍma, Mahāpaḍma, Paḍmāvatī, Śaṅkhā, Nalinā, Kumudā, Saritā, Vaprā, Suvaprā, Mahāṣaprā, Vprakāvatī, Gandhā, Sugandhā, Gandhāvatsugaṇdhā, and Gandhamālinī - these are the thirty-two Videha-kṣetra countries. And Dakṣema, Domapurī, Ariṣṭā, Ariṣṭapurī, Khaḍga, Mañjūṣā, Auṣadhī, Puṇḍarīkiṇī, Susīmā, Kuṇḍalā, Aparājita, Prabhaikara, Aṅkavati, Paḍmāvatī, Śubhā, Rala-sāyā, Aśvapurī, Siṃhapurī, Mahāpurī, Vijayapurī, Arajā, Virajā, Aśokā, Vītaśokā, Vijayā, Vaijayantī, Jayantī, Aparājita, Cakrapurī, Khaṅgapurī, Ayodhyā, and Avadhyā - these are the thirty-two cities, capitals of those countries. These Vaksāra mountains, Vibhaṅga rivers, and countries, all are described in a clockwise manner, starting from the north of the Sitā river, near the Meru mountain. Besides these, the Vyantara Devas showed the ocean, forests, and everything else, all of which the prince saw. As per his wish, he saw the Manuṣottara mountain and all the beloved places residing within it. The prince, radiating his brilliance, saw the great...

**1** Vaiśravaṇādim: L.
**2** Vikatāvatī G. Vijayāvatā L.
**3** Gambhīramālinī G, L, M.
**4** Paḍmakāvatyabhikyayā Kh. Paḍmāvatyabhidhoditām G.
**5** Nalinākhyā ca L.
**6** Gandhavatī śabdā L.
**7** Vausadhī Kh. Nyauṣadhī Gh. Vausādhī M.
**8** Śubhaśabdābhidhānā ca Kh, G.

Page #218:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

They worshipped the unartificial Jain temples with joy, praised them with meaningful hymns, and then returned to their city with great festivities. || 208-220 || Arriving there, those Vyantara Devas worshipped the king by offering divine ornaments and speaking peaceful words, and then they went to their abode. || 221 || The man who does not cross the ocean of favor by means of reciprocal action, that is, who does not reciprocate the favor of a benefactor, is like a scentless flower, dead even while living. || 222 || If these two cocks are thus appreciative of favors, then why does a man age in his body if he has not done a favor? If he has not done a favor, he is a wicked person. || 223 ||

One day, inspired by the opportunity of time, the wise king Dhanarath began to think in his mind about the body and so on. || 224 || This creature is to be cursed! It is a great misfortune that this creature considers the body to be desirable and dwells in it, yet it does not consider this body more repulsive than a house of excrement. || 225 || Those things that produce contentment are called happiness. But where are such happinesses found for beings in this world? One should consider this to be a manifestation of delusion, in which this creature begins to consider the pains caused by sin to be happiness. || 226 ||

If it is certain that the creature will live from birth to the last moment, then that is fine. But even if it lives for a moment, when there is no certainty of that, why is this creature not eager to do what is beneficial for itself? || 227 || These brothers and relatives are a kind of bondage, and wealth is also a calamity for beings. If it were not so, why would the virtuous men of old go into the forest? || 228 ||

While Dhanarath was thinking thus, the Laukantika Devas, knowing his state of knowledge, arrived to support his desired object. || 229 || They said, "O Deva! Who can give you advice on what is beneficial? You yourself know what is to be avoided and what is to be adopted." Thus, the Laukantika Devas praised the praiseworthy Lord Dhanarath, worshipped him with celestial flowers, followed their own duty, and then went up into the sky to go to their respective places. || 230-232 ||

Then, Lord Dhanarath gave the kingdom to Megha-rath, preceded by an anointment ceremony. The Devas anointed him, and thus he himself took on restraint.

Page #219:
---------------------------
Trishatittama Parva
161. Having purified his mind, speech, and body, and conquered his senses, the wise one vomited out the poison of the kṣayās, which are considered low, and attained freedom from delusion. || 233 ||
162. Ascending the Kṣapaśreṇī, he, free from attachment, gradually eradicated all karmas, and attained a pure state, fit for liberation. || 234 ||
163. At that time, due to the power of his attainment of Kaivalya, the seats of the gods trembled. They all came and worshipped him with all their wealth. || 235 ||
164. Once, King Megha-ratha, along with his queens, was enjoying himself in the Devaramaṇa garden, seated on a platform of moonstone. || 236 ||
165. At that time, a Vidyadhara was passing overhead. His flying chariot stopped in the sky, as if it had been caught in a large net. || 237 ||
166. The Vidyadhara was very angry because his chariot had stopped. He wanted to lift the stone on which King Megha-ratha was sitting, but the king pressed his big toe against the stone, and the Vidyadhara was crushed by the weight of the stone. || 238 ||
167. Unable to bear the weight of the stone, he cried out in a sorrowful voice. Seeing this, his wife, the Vidyadhari, came and said, "O Lord, I am an orphan! I beg you, give me a husband." || 239 ||
168. When she pleaded thus, Megha-ratha lifted his foot. Seeing all this, Priyamitra asked King Megha-ratha, "O Lord, what is all this?" || 240 ||
169. Hearing this, King Megha-ratha said, "On Mount Vijayā, there is a king of the Vidyadharas named Vidyadanta. His wife's name is Anilvega. This is their son, Simha-ratha. He was paying homage to the Jina, seated in his flying chariot named Amit. For some reason, his chariot stopped above me and could not go forward. When he looked in all directions, he saw me. Seeing me, his body trembled with anger due to pride. He wanted to lift us all along with the stone platform. I pressed my big toe against the stone, and he was crushed. This is his wife, Manorama." || 241 ||
170. Hearing this, Queen Priyamitra asked again, "What is the reason for his anger?" || 242 ||

Page #220:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**162**

Is this the only reason, or is there something else? Is it related to this birth or to a previous birth? When Priyamitra asked this, Megha-ratha replied, "This is the only reason, there is nothing else." Saying this, he began to speak of his previous birth. ||245||

In the eastern part of the second continent, Dhataki-khand, in the region of Airavata, in the city of Shankapur, King Rajagupta ruled. His wife's name was Shatika. One day, both the husband and wife, from the Shankasail mountain, received the Jinaguna-khyati fast from the Muni-raja, Sarvagupta. On another day, the Muni-raja, Dhriti-shena, was wandering for alms. Seeing him, the couple gave him alms and received the five wonders, including a rain of jewels. ||246-248||

After that, King Rajagupta took sannyasa from the Muni-raja, Samadhi-gupta, and became Brahma-indra, the possessor of a long lifespan. From there, he was reborn as Simha-ratha. Shashika also wandered in the world and attained heaven through tapas. From there, she fell down and was born as the daughter of King Sendra-ketu and his wife, Suprabha, in the city of Vastvalaya, on the southern bank of the Vijayardha mountain. Her name was Madan-vega. ||249-251||

Hearing this, King Simha-ratha was very pleased. He went to King Megha-ratha and worshipped him according to the proper rituals. He gave the kingdom to his son, Suvarna-tilaka, and along with many kings, he took Jain initiation near the Tirthankara, Ghana-ratha. Meanwhile, the intelligent Madan-vega also went to the Aryika, Priyamitra, who was a treasure trove of virtues, and began to perform severe austerities. This is right, because even anger is considered to be a remover of the stain of anger. ||252-254||

Then, due to the glory of his excellent kingdom, obtained through his virtuous deeds, his every desire was fulfilled, up to the attainment of the fruits of the three goals. He was endowed with pure right faith, virtuous conduct, and other virtues. He was humble, learned in the scriptures, serious, truthful, and had attained the seven supreme states. He was radiant among the noble beings, and was served by his wife, children, and others. One day, King Megha-ratha was giving a discourse on Jainism, having performed the Ashta-hrik puja and observing a fast, when a trembling pigeon came to him, followed by a swift hawk. Standing before the king, the hawk said, "O Lord! I am suffering from intense hunger. Therefore, I have come to your refuge. This pigeon, which is my prey, is in your protection." ||255-258||

**What is the reason?** ||241-244||

This is the only reason, there is nothing else. Is it related to this birth or to a previous birth? When Priyamitra asked this, Megha-ratha replied, "This is the only reason, there is nothing else." Saying this, he began to speak of his previous birth. ||245||

Page #221:
---------------------------
The Trishatitam Chapter

Another vulture, bound by his past deeds, stood before the king and said, "Oh King, I am a great sufferer, tormented by hunger. This pigeon has come to me for refuge. Please give it to me, oh generous one. If you do not, consider me dead." || 259 ||

Hearing this, the prince, Dridharatha, said, "Oh venerable one, please tell me, why is this vulture speaking in this way? I am astonished by his words." || 261 ||

Hearing his brother's question, the king, Megha-ratha, said, "In the Jambudvipa, in the region of Airavata, situated to the north of Mount Meru, there is a city called Padmini-kheta. In this city, there lived a merchant named Sagar-sena. His wife was Amit-mati. They had two younger sons, Dhanamitra and Nandishena. Due to their greed for wealth, they fought with each other and killed each other. They were reborn as this pigeon and vulture." || 262-264 ||

"There is a god standing above the vulture. Who is he? If you wish to know, I will tell you. In the battle of Damitar, the one you killed, Hemaratha, after wandering in the world, became a sage named Soma on the banks of the Parnakanta river, on the shores of Mount Kailasa. His son, Chandra, born to his wife, Shridatta, was a scholar of the Kushastra. He performed the Panchami Tapa and was born as a god in the Jyotir-loka." || 265-267 ||

"Once, he went to heaven and in the assembly of Indra, the gods praised him saying, 'There is no other giver on earth greater than Megha-ratha.' Hearing this praise, I was filled with anger and came here to test you. Listen carefully, brother, to the characteristics of giving." || 268-269 ||

"The wise have said that giving something of one's own for the benefit of others is called giving. The word 'anugraha' also means to benefit oneself and others." || 270 ||

"One who is endowed with the qualities of strength, knowledge, faith, etc., is called a giver. And that which increases the qualities of both the giver and the receiver, and does not cause pain, is called 'deya'." || 271 ||

"The omniscient has said that there are four types of 'deya': food, medicine, knowledge, and compassion for all beings. These four are pure 'deya' and are the means of liberation, one after the other." || 272 ||

"The one who is on the path of liberation and protects himself and others from the cycle of birth and death is the recipient. The one who is free from karmic impurities and has achieved liberation has said this." || 273 ||

"Having achieved liberation and wishing to protect the world, the perfect one spoke these words. He is the giver to the worthy, and his gift is the true recipient." || 274 ||

"Give me the pigeon. Oh generous one! If you do not give me this pigeon, consider me dead." || 255-260 ||

Hearing these words of the vulture, the prince, Dridharatha, said, "Oh venerable one, please tell me, why is this vulture speaking in this way? I am astonished by his words." || 261 ||

Hearing his brother's question, the king, Megha-ratha, said, "In the Jambudvipa, in the region of Airavata, situated to the north of Mount Meru, there is a city called Padmini-kheta. In this city, there lived a merchant named Sagar-sena. His wife was Amit-mati. They had two younger sons, Dhanamitra and Nandishena. Due to their greed for wealth, they fought with each other and killed each other. They were reborn as this pigeon and vulture." || 262-264 ||

"There is a god standing above the vulture. Who is he? If you wish to know, I will tell you. In the battle of Damitar, the one you killed, Hemaratha, after wandering in the world, became a sage named Soma on the banks of the Parnakanta river, on the shores of Mount Kailasa. His son, Chandra, born to his wife, Shridatta, was a scholar of the Kushastra. He performed the Panchami Tapa and was born as a god in the Jyotir-loka." || 265-267 ||

"Once, he went to heaven and in the assembly of Indra, the gods praised him saying, 'There is no other giver on earth greater than Megha-ratha.' Hearing this praise, I was filled with anger and came here to test you. Listen carefully, brother, to the characteristics of giving." || 268-269 ||

"The wise have said that giving something of one's own for the benefit of others is called giving. The word 'anugraha' also means to benefit oneself and others." || 270 ||

"One who is endowed with the qualities of strength, knowledge, faith, etc., is called a giver. And that which increases the qualities of both the giver and the receiver, and does not cause pain, is called 'deya'." || 271 ||

"The omniscient has said that there are four types of 'deya': food, medicine, knowledge, and compassion for all beings. These four are pure 'deya' and are the means of liberation, one after the other." || 272 ||

"The one who is on the path of liberation and protects himself and others from the cycle of birth and death is the recipient. The one who is free from karmic impurities and has achieved liberation has said this." || 273 ||

"Having achieved liberation and wishing to protect the world, the perfect one spoke these words. He is the giver to the worthy, and his gift is the true recipient." || 274 ||

Page #222:
---------------------------
164
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Not meat, etc., is to be given, nor is one who desires it a worthy recipient. The giver and the receiver are both to be known as rulers of hell. || 275 || Therefore, the greedy one is not a worthy recipient, nor is this pigeon to be given. Thus, hearing the words of Maegha-rathi, the celestial astrologer said, || 276 || "You are a knower of the division of charity, and a hero of charity, O king." Thus praising him, showing his own form, and worshipping him, he departed. || 277 || Knowing the words spoken by the two twice-born, the two birds, having abandoned their bodies, became two celestial beings named Deva-raman in the forest, named Surupa and Prati-rupa. || 278 || Then, by the grace of Maegha-rathi, the two celestial beings, born from a low womb, came to the king, saying, "O king, we have come from the forest." Worshipping him, they departed. || 279 || Once, the king, having given charity to the lord of the tamed, a wise man, obtained the five wonders of the charana. || 280 || Having performed a great worship of Nandi-ishvara, he was sustained. At night, meditating on the image-yoga, he stood like the king of mountains. || 281 || Knowing this, Ishana-indra said with joy, "O Marut-tasi, you are pure Samyag-drishti, and you are the essence of courage. Today, this is a wonder." || 282 || Hearing this praise of himself, the gods asked, "Whose praise have you spoken?" In reply, Indra said to the gods, "Maegha-rathi, the foremost among kings, is very courageous, pure Samyag-drishti, and today he is engaged in image-yoga. I have praised him out of devotion." || 283-284 || Hearing this, the two goddesses, Ati-rupa and Surupa, who were very skilled in testing, came to the king. With their allurements, illusions, gestures, songs, conversations, and other causes of lustful madness, they tried to shake his mental strength. But just as a creeper of lightning cannot shake Mount Sumeru, so too, those goddesses could not shake the mental strength of King Maegha-rathi. Finally, they praised him, saying, "What Ishana-indra has said is true," and departed to heaven. || 285-287 ||

Page #223:
---------------------------
The Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacaritra, Chapter 165

288. "By chance, in the midst of the desert, I heard of the beauty of your beloved wife, Priyamitra, from another country."
289. "Ratiṣeṇa and Rati, two celestial beings, desired to see her, adorned with fragrant oils, at the time of her bath."
290. "Having correctly understood Indra's words, and desiring to speak with her, they assumed the form of young women and sent word through a friend."
291. "Hearing from the friend that two wealthy young women, daughters of a merchant, wished to see her, Priyamitra joyfully said, 'Very well, let them stay.'"
292. "Having thus arranged for their stay, she called them and showed herself to them. Upon seeing her, the two celestial beings said, 'Her radiance is not as it was before.'"
293. "Hearing their words, Priyamitra looked at the king's face. He said to her, 'My dear, it is indeed so.'"
294. "The celestial beings then assumed their true forms and recounted their arrival, lamenting her extraordinary but impermanent beauty."
295. "Knowing that nothing in this world is imperishable, they worshipped Priyamitra with hearts detached, and departed for heaven, their radiance filling the horizons."
296. "The king comforted Priyamitra, saying, 'This entire world is a mixture of the permanent and the impermanent. Do not grieve in your heart.'"
297. "Enjoying his kingdom with his wives, King Megha-ratha experienced great joy. One day, he went to the beautiful garden called Manohara."
298. "There, he saw his father, the Tirthankara Dhanaratha, seated on a throne, surrounded by gods and demigods. With his entire family, he circumambulated the throne three times, paid homage, and, desiring the welfare of all beings, inquired about the practices of the Śrāvakas."
299. "It is fitting, for the actions of the virtuous are like the wish-fulfilling tree, always benefiting others."
300. "O Lord, you have previously divided into categories the eleven places of the Śrāvakas. Now, tell me about the seventh Anga, called Upāsakādhyayana, which describes the practices of the Śrāvakas, for the benefit of those who wish to do good."
301. "Thus, upon King Megha-ratha's request, Dhanaratha, the Tirthankara, who fulfilled the desires of those who sought his help, explained as follows."
302. "First, there are the practices of the womb, then the practices of initiation, and then other practices of action. Their number is also explained in accordance with the truth."

Page #224:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
1
The first set of actions, from conception to liberation, are thirty-five in number. These are for those who have attained purity of right faith.  They have been described previously.  The actions related to initiation, from incarnation to liberation, are forty-eight in number. These are conducive to liberation.  The actions related to karma, from taking refuge to attaining perfection, are seven in number.  The nature, method, and fruits of these actions have been described in detail.  Having heard the teachings of the Shravaka Dharma from the Tirthankara Dhanarath, King MeghaRath bowed down with devotion and calmed his mind for liberation.  Contemplating the misery of the body, enjoyment, and the cycle of birth and death, he turned towards self-control.  He said to his younger brother, Dridharath, "You should rule the kingdom."  But Dridharath replied, "The faults you have seen in the kingdom, I too have seen.  Since this kingdom is worthy of being taken and then abandoned, it is better not to take it in the first place.  It is said in the world that it is better to avoid touching mud altogether than to wash it off."  Thus, when Dridharath refused to take the kingdom, he gave it to his son, MeghaSen, according to the proper procedure.  He then took initiation along with his younger brother and seven thousand other kings.  He became knowledgeable in the eleven Angas in due course.  At the same time, he contemplated the sixteen causes of karma that bind the Tirthankara.  The interest in the path of liberation, free from karma, as taught by the Jinas, is called purity of faith.  It has eight aspects, including freedom from doubt.  The abandonment of doubt, the absence of doubt, is known as freedom from doubt.  The abandonment of the desire for the enjoyment of the two worlds, based on false perception, is called freedom from desire, the second aspect, which is based on the purity of faith.  The abandonment of the thought, "I am pure," even though one knows that the body and other things are impure, is called freedom from doubt.

Page #225:
---------------------------
## Triṣaṣṭitala Parva

**167** Or, if this is not the case in the mind of the Arhant, then everything is right, this is a false claim. The abandonment of this false claim is the **Nirvicikitsā** anga. **316**

In the many paths of **Mithyanaya**, which are not truly the truth but appear as such, the absence of delusion, "This is right," is called the **Amūḍha Drṣṭi** anga. **317**

The growth of **Ātma Dharma** through the contemplation of **Kṣamā** etc. is called the **Upabriṁhaṇa** anga, which is dear to the **Samyagdṛṣṭi**. **318**

The arising of **Kaṣāya** etc. is the cause of the destruction of Dharma. The protection of oneself or others from falling away from Dharma in the presence of these is called the **Sthitikaraṇa** anga. **319**

Constant affection for the nectar of **Sad Dharma** taught by the **Jina** is called the **Vātsalya** anga, and the contemplation of the greatness of the path, the spreading of the influence of the **Jina** path, is called the **Prabhāvanā** anga. **320**

Respect for **Samyagjñāna** etc. and their holders, and the absence of **Kaṣāya** in the outcome, are both called **Vinaya Sampannatā** by the virtuous. **321**

The absence of fault in the distinctions of **Vrata** and **Śīla**-bound character, the absence of transgression, is called **Śīlavantānaticāra** by the best of the learned. **322**

The constant contemplation of the scriptures is the constant use of knowledge. Constant fear of the unbearable suffering of the world is called **Samvega**. **323**

Giving **Āhāra**, **Abhaya**, and the scriptures to deserving recipients is called **Tyāga**. Performing **Kāyakleśa** according to the **Āgama** and according to one's strength is called **Tapa**. **324**

At times, due to external and internal causes, there may be obstacles in the performance of **Tapa** by the **Muni Sangha**. The protection of the **Muni Sangha** in such a situation is called **Sādhu Samādhi**. **325**

The removal of the suffering of the virtuous through a faultless method is the supreme means of **Tapa**, called **Vaiyāvṛttya**. **326**

Affection for the **Arhant Deva**, **Ācārya**, **Bahušruta**, and the **Āgama** with purity of mind, speech, and body is called **Aikanti**, **Prācāryabhakti**, **Bahušrutabhakti**, and **Pravacanabhakti** respectively. **327**

The performance of the six essentials, **Sāmāyika** etc., at the appropriate time, according to the **Āgama**, is called the **Āvaśyakāparihāṇi** anga. **328**

The wise call the spreading of Dharma through knowledge, **Tapa**, worship of the **Jina**, or any other means, **Mārga Prabhāvanā**. **329**

**1-** This is **Kha**, **Ga**. **2** **Yukti** should be **Bha**- **Ma**. **3** **Kaṣāyopādād** in **La**. **4** **Bhāvanam** in **Ka**, **Gha**, **Ma**. **5** **Nibaddha** in **La**. **6** **Prāhu** in **La**. **7** **Bhāva** with **Śuddhya**- **Kha**.

**Dāna**, **Tapa**, **Jina Pūjā**, **Vidya**, and **Atiśaya** are the means by which **Jina Dharma** is to be spread. The **Ratnatraya** constantly illuminates the path to the attainment of **Purusartha**.

Page #226:
---------------------------
168
**The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

Just as a cow has natural affection for her calf, so too do those who are devoted to the Dharma have natural affection for those who are their co-religionists. Those who are beyond praise extol this affection as *vatsalya*.  [330]

The Jina, the Lord, considers these sixteen *bhavanas* (emotions) as the cause of the *tithankara* *namakarma* bondage, either individually or collectively. [331]

The *muni* Megha-ratha bound himself with this pure *tithankara* *namakarma* bondage, which caused a disturbance in all three realms. [332]

He wandered through many lands in succession and arrived at the city of Sri-pura. The king there, Sri-sena, gave him alms in a proper manner. After that, in the city of Nanda-pura, the devout king Nanda gave him alms. And then, in the city of Pundarika, the pure *samyak-drishti* king Simha-sena gave him alms. The *muni* was increasing his knowledge, insight, conduct, and austerities in many ways. By giving him alms, all these kings attained the *pancha-acharya* (five wonders). [333-335]

Megha-ratha, the very strong and valiant, attained the highest *samyama* (self-control) on the mountain called Nabha-tilaka, along with his *drdha-ratha* (firm chariot). He renounced the world for a month and then, with a peaceful mind, relinquished his body and attained the state of *aham-indra* (the lord of the self). [336-337]

Both of them had a lifespan equal to thirty-three oceans. Their bodies were as bright as the moon, and they had a white *leshya*. They breathed once every sixteen and a half months, and they ate ambrosia once every thirty-three thousand years. They were filled with joy without any fluctuation, and their eyes of *avijñana* (non-knowledge) saw the objects that were suitable for their *yogic* state, which were in the middle of the *loka-nadi* (stream of the world). Their field of power, brilliance, and activity was equal to the field of *avadhi-jnana* (clairvoyance). Thus, they remained there for a long time. From there, they will take birth again and attain the union with *moksha-lakshmi* (the goddess of liberation) in due course. [338-341]

Now, in the land of Bharata, there is a country called Kuru-jangala. It is situated in the middle of the Aryan land, is the source of all kinds of grains, and is the largest. [342]

There, betel vines are entwined around areca nut trees, which are laden with fruit. They seem to be expressing the joy of embracing men and boys. [343]

The *choch* trees are beautiful and majestic, with their roots firmly planted in the ground. They are like a good king, for just as a good king provides his subjects with the best food and enjoyment, so too do the *choch* trees provide the best fruits. [344]

Page #227:
---------------------------
Trishatititama Parva
166
The trees of the Chocha clan were as tall and generous as the best kings, with roots as firm as those of a king, and as beautiful as the most handsome of men. They were adorned with fine leaves, just as a king is adorned with fine horses. || 344 ||
The banana trees were as pleasing as women, for they were as beautiful to look at, as delicate, as shady, as juicy, and as beautiful as women. || 345 ||
The mango trees were laden with fruit, their new shoots and flowers bright, filled with the songs of cuckoos and buzzing with swarms of bees. || 346 ||
The jackfruit trees were abundant, with large, ripe fruits, their fragrance attracting swarms of bees, and bearing fruit from their very roots. || 347 ||
All the bushes, vines, and trees were bent under the weight of their flowers, as if they were the pleasure gardens of the king of love, Kamadeva. || 348 ||
The land was free of pits, holes, stones, and unevenness. It was free of the eight fears, and always bore fruit. || 349 ||
Just as those who follow the path of virtue without fail never need to perform penance, so too the people of this land, by upholding their own dharma, never feared punishment. || 350 ||
The lakes were always filled with fish and clean water, adorned with various flowers, and rivaled the beauty of the heavens. || 351 ||
The trees were like kings in their conduct, for they had eyes like lotus flowers, were tall and generous, had branches like long arms, and always bore beautiful fruit. || 352 ||
The various vines were as beautiful as women, for they had red lips, were adorned with flowers, and had delicate bodies and swarms of bees. || 353 ||

Page #228:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**200**

The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, from the root of the Rasa to the end, is tasteless. Therefore, the inhabitants of the earth, who are always wicked, are tormented. || 354 ||

In the production of sound, there is a loss, a gain, and a destruction of the wicked. Burning is in the case of the bereaved, and piercing is in the ears. || 355 ||

Punishment is only in the case of wood, sharpness is only in weapons, poverty is only in the case of ascetics, and the absence of pride is only in the case of elephants. || 356 ||

Shamelessness is only in sexual acts, begging is only from beautiful girls, heat is only in those who live by fire, and killing is only in the case of those who practice alchemy. || 357 ||

There are no untimely deaths, no one walks the wrong path, and except for those who are free from bodies and those who are engaged in mortal combat, there are no others who are free from strife. || 358 ||

There was no violation of the ancient practice of the six acts of worship by any of the four castes who were filled with hatred. If there was a violation of the ancient practice, it was only in the case of those who had taken vows of restraint. || 359 ||

The stalks of grain, which had grown playfully and satisfied everyone, became very humble when they bore fruit, bowing down. Therefore, they were like a good king. || 360 ||

The clouds rained in due season, the cows always gave milk, all the trees bore fruit, and the spreading vines were always adorned with flowers. || 361 ||

The people were always celebrating, free from disease, free from compulsion, wealthy, pure, constantly engaged in their duties, and devoted to their own work. || 362 ||

The vines had red buds, just as women are adorned with a gentle smile. The vines were full of flowers, just as women are slender. The vines were adorned with black bees, just as women are adorned with black hair. The vines were adorned with the best leaves, just as women are adorned with the best ornaments. || 353 ||

The sugarcane, which was sweet from the root to the middle and tasteless at the end, was crushed well by machines in order to conquer those wicked people. || 354 ||

Page #229:
---------------------------
The Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacaritra, Chapter 201

Just as the navel is the center of the body, so too is Hastinapura the center of the Kuru country. || 363 ||

Surrounded by three moats, the city was adorned with many flowers that had sprung up from the abundant water. || 364 ||

The city was fortified with ramparts, towers, and gates, and was further embellished with rows of balconies and watchtowers resembling the heads of lions. || 365 ||

It was also adorned with images of elephants and horses, meant to frighten, and with many narrow lanes. || 366 ||

The city's roads, filled with essential goods and bustling with virtuous people, resembled the paths to heaven and liberation. || 367 ||

There was no difference between the people of this city in terms of their possessions, such as clothes and ornaments, but only in terms of their lineage, caste, age, varna, speech, and knowledge. || 368 ||

The flags flying atop the towers of the city's palaces prevented the sun's rays from entering, even on days when the sun was not obscured by clouds. || 369 ||

The air was filled with the fragrance of flowers, perfumes, and incense, attracting swarms of bees, which made the peacocks in the houses fear the rainy season. || 370 ||

The city was filled with young men and women, adorned with beauty, grace, and charm, who brought joy to each other. || 371 ||

The city was filled with a constant atmosphere of love and affection between husbands and wives, fueled by aphrodisiacs, natural love, and qualities like beauty. || 372 ||

The city's religion was characterized by non-violence, its ascetics were free from desire, and its gods were the Arhats, free from all faults. Therefore, all the people of the city were virtuous. || 373 ||

The city's devotees quickly atoned for any sins they accumulated through their work, such as grinding grain or cooking, by performing acts of charity, such as giving alms. || 374 ||

The city's king was just, its people were virtuous, its land was free from living beings, and its inhabitants engaged in daily study. Therefore, the Jina masters never left the city. || 375 ||

The city was surrounded by beautiful gardens, filled with trees laden with flowers and fruits, which brought joy to all. || 376 ||

Page #230:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

**Verse 377:** All the best things that are produced in the world are not meant to be enjoyed in their place of origin. Therefore, all the best things from everywhere come to that city and are enjoyed by its inhabitants.

**Verse 378:** If any substance goes out of that city, it can only go out through charity. Thus, that city was filled with the aforementioned renunciants and enjoyers.

**Verse 379:** All the people of that city were *taadattvika* - they only looked at the present and spent whatever they earned. This tendency of theirs was not blameworthy because their merit increased all things every day.

**Verse 380:** In the northern part of the Brahma-sthana, there was a royal palace, adorned with the radiant *Bhadrashala*, *Uttamakota*, etc., and resembling the great Mount Meru adorned with forests like *Bhadrashala*, etc.

**Verse 381:** Around that royal palace, in their respective places, were other radiant and beautiful palaces, which were adorned like the stars around Mount Meru.

**Verse 382:** In that Hastinapur capital, the radiant King Ajit Sena, of the Kashyapa lineage, ruled. He had a wife named Priyadarshana, who delighted his mind and eyes.

**Verse 383:** She had seen auspicious dreams like those of the young moon, etc., and gave birth to a son named Vishvasena, who had fallen from the Brahma-heaven.

**Verse 384:** The daughter of the king Ajitanjaya of the Gandhara city in the Gandhara country, named Aira, was born to his queen Ajita. She came from the *Sanatkumara* heaven and became the beloved queen of King Vishvasena.

**Verse 385:** Goddesses like Shri, Hri, etc., served her. On the seventh day of the month of Bhadrapada, in the *Bharani* constellation, in the fourth part of the night, she saw sixteen dreams that would give her the fruit of a son.

**Verse 386:** After seeing sixteen dreams, Queen Aira, who was slightly awake and whose mouth emitted a pure fragrance, saw an elephant entering her mouth.

**Verse 387:** At that very moment, the divine being *Megha-ratha* fell from heaven and entered the womb of Queen Aira, just as a drop of water enters a shell to become a pearl.

**Verse 388:** At that very moment, the last watch of the night sounded, as if to awaken the sleeping beauty and announce her auspicious dreams.

**Verse 389:** Hearing the sound of the drum, Queen Aira's lotus-like face blossomed. She got up from her bed and performed auspicious rituals.

Page #231:
---------------------------
Trishatittama Parva
203
She departed for the royal assembly, adorned with appropriate garments and ornaments, like a moving Kalpa-creeper. The group of rays of the young sun was terrified by the white umbrella she carried, and her great prosperity was manifested by the waving chowries.  She was accompanied by a few people.  Just as the line of the moon enters the night, so she entered the royal assembly. The king gave her his own seat of honor, as she bowed in formal respect.  She recounted to the king the dream she had seen, step by step, and inquired about its meaning from the king, who possessed the eyes of knowledge.  At that time, Indra, along with the gods of the four quarters, descended from heaven and began to celebrate the auspicious occasion of the incarnation.  Meanwhile, Indra was growing in the queen's womb with great prosperity, and the mother of the Lord of the Three Worlds was receiving the worship of the gods, including rain of jewels, for fifteen months.  When the ninth month arrived, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of Jyeshtha, in the Yama Yoga, at dawn, she gave birth to a son.  He was so beautiful, as if he were the embodiment of the joy of the entire world.  He also possessed three bright eyes, representing pure mind, faith, and knowledge.  The gods of the four quarters, who had been informed of the birth of the Jina by the sound of conch shells, drums, lion roars, and bells, came together to celebrate the birth of the Jina.  At that time, Mahadevi Indraani, who illuminated the directions, entered the womb-chamber and, with the help of Maya-sleep, subdued the virtuous Jina-mother, Aira, along with her son.  She circumambulated the venerable Jina-mother and paid her respects.  She placed a Maya-created child in front of her and, taking up the supreme Kumar, the Jina-child, who is worshipped by all the gods, she carried him in her two tender arms and handed him over to Indra.  Indra placed him on the back of the elephant Airavata.  Just as Lord Adinatha was placed on the summit of Mount Sumeru and anointed with the water of the ocean of milk, so also was he placed on the summit of Mount Sumeru and anointed with the water of the ocean of milk.

Page #232:
---------------------------
204
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, there is a special adornment, an adornment for the observance of conduct. Having adorned him with ornaments, [Indra] said, "He who brings peace to all, is called Shanti." Thus, at the end of his abhisheka, he named him Shanti Nath. 405
With love, the celestial beings brought him from Mount Mandara to the palace. Indra informed his mother of everything and entrusted the Lord of the Three Worlds to her. 407
Filled with joy, Indra danced, his many emotions and tastes rising. When joy transgresses all bounds, who among the passionate does not dance? 408
Although the Lord was the protector of all the worlds, Indra appointed the Lokapalas to protect this child, the great soul. 409
Thus, after the celebration of the birth-auspiciousness, all the gods, along with Indra, went to their respective places. 410
After the Tirthankara Dharmanatha, half a palya less than three sagaras passed, and for half a palya, Dharma was severed. Then, Shanti Nath, the Lord, who is worshipped by humans and gods, was born. His lifespan was included in this. 411-412
His lifespan was one hundred thousand years, his body forty dhanushas tall, his complexion like gold, and his body bore the marks of a flag, a torana, the sun, the moon, a conch, and a chakra. 413
By the power of his virtuous deeds, Dridharatha enjoyed the position of Indra for a long time. His son, Chakraayudha, was born to Yashasvati, the second queen of King Vishvasena. 414
Just as a great gem grows in the ocean, a group of qualities grows in a muni, and joy increases in the manifested prosperity, so too was the child Shanti Nath growing. 415
His many qualities were growing, as if in competition with each other, in a gradual order, and fame, fortune, and Saraswati were growing like his own sisters. 416
Just as the disc of the moon, free from blemishes and fragments, shines brightly on the full moon night, so too, his form, having attained full youth, was becoming more beautiful with the attainment of beauty. 417
His head was adorned with auspicious, soft, thin, smooth, black, and curly hair, like a swarm of bees gathered on a flower. 418
His head...

Page #233:
---------------------------
## Triṣaṣṭitāma Parva
### 205

**420.**  His forehead was broad and high, as if it were destined to be adorned with the royal diadem. Lakshmi would grace it with her presence, adorned with both the Dharma-patta and the Rajya-patta.

**421.** His eyebrows were beautiful and slightly curved, resembling those of a courtesan.  But their curvature was not merely a line; it was a reflection of the moon's radiance.

**422.** Those who contemplate auspicious features say that long eyes are a good sign.  It seems that they must have observed his eyes and then formed this opinion.  This is the praise of his eyes.

**423.** If his ears were capable of receiving all knowledge, then they cannot be described, for this is the rarest thing in the world.  Beauty can be found elsewhere.

**424.**  "This one will conquer the Mohamalla, the vanquisher of all," so thought the Creator, and thus he made his nose high and prominent.

**425.**  The Creator made his cheeks smooth and broad, thinking, "Saraswati, born from his mouth, will write with her divine play."

**426.**  His white, smooth, dense, and evenly spaced teeth raised the question:  Are these the subtle nuances of Saraswati's gentle laughter, or are they rows of pure letters?

**427.**  The ripe fruit of the banyan tree, the bimba fruit, and the coral may be compared to the lips of others, but not to his.  His lips were not called "adhara" (lower) because they were not inferior.

**428.**  The chins of others are covered by their future beards, but his chin was always visible, indicating that it was created solely for beauty.

**429.**  The moon is waning and marked with blemishes, and the lotus is born from mud and stained with dust.  Therefore, neither can be compared to his face.

**430.**  If a divine sound emanated from his throat, a mirror reflecting all things, then what need is there to describe the beauty of his throat separately?

**431.**  He, the Lord of the Three Worlds, was adorned with his shoulders, which competed with his head in height, like a golden mountain with three peaks.

**432.**  His arms, reaching down to his knees, were adorned with armlets and other ornaments, and they seemed to want to lift the earth.

**433.**  The Creator, with his divine vision, made his chest broad and expansive.  Many fortunes would reside there, unhindered.

Page #234:
---------------------------
## Chapter 206

**The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana describes the body of the Tirthankara:**

**Verse 434:** His chest was wide, adorned with a garland of jewels, and resembled the shore of the Himalayas, where the setting sun casts a reddish hue.

**Verse 435:** His waist was slender, capable of bearing the weight of his upper body without strain, making his leanness beautiful.

**Verse 436:** His navel was deep, spiraling clockwise, a symbol of progress, adorned with a lotus mark, and situated in the center. Why wouldn't such a navel be worthy of praise?

**Verse 437:** His waist was adorned with a belt, beautiful and graceful, resembling the sacred platform of Jambudvipa.

**Verse 438:** His thighs were round, smooth, and pleasant to touch, resembling the trunk of a banana tree. However, unlike the banana tree, which bears fruit only once, his thighs bore fruit repeatedly. And while the banana tree cannot bear weight, his thighs could bear immense burdens.

**Verse 439:** His knees marked the boundary between his thighs and shanks, making them worthy of praise. For those who perform good deeds are always deserving of appreciation.

**Verse 440:** His feet were worshipped by all the gods, including Indra, and Lakshmi served him. With such glorious feet, what more can be said about his shanks?

**Verse 441:** His ankles possessed a hidden quality, like the depth of a mantra. They were fruitful, for all things that bear fruit are considered virtuous.

**Verse 442:** The backs of his feet resembled the shell of a tortoise, and the earth found stability in their support. It is said that the earth is held by a tortoise, and this belief likely originated from this very sight.

**Verse 443:** His big toes were thick, raised, well-positioned, and sources of comfort. They seemed to point the way to heaven and liberation.

**Verse 444:** His eight fingers were close together, as if eight powers had manifested to conquer the eight karmas.

**Verse 445:** His ten nails were beautiful, as if the ten virtues, including forgiveness, had come to serve him through these nails.

**Verse 446:** His feet, resembling tender leaves, were worshipped by Indra and the other gods, as if they recognized that they were part of the divine body.

**Verse 433:** It was as if the Creator had made his chest very wide, so that all beings could reside within it without hindering each other.

Page #235:
---------------------------
## The Trishatittama Parva

**Chapter 207**

**47.** The moon's cool rays and the sun's heat cannot be compared to his brilliance. His radiance was like that of the Kalpavriksha, the wish-fulfilling tree, adorned with jewels.

**448.** How can one describe his beauty when even Indra, with his thousand eyes, turns away from the lotus face of Sachi (Indrani) to gaze upon him?

**449.** The ornaments, like a cluster of great jewels, shone brightly, adorned by their contact with his body.

**450.** His voice, like the roar of a lion, dried up the pride of the elephant-like enemies, just as the sound of the king of the birds, the Garuda, silences the roar of the king of the snakes.

**451.** His fame, like a creeper, had reached the edge of the universe even before his birth. But without a support, it remained there, unable to spread further.

**452.** His father arranged marriages for him with many beautiful daughters, adorned with qualities like lineage, beauty, youth, character, skills, and radiance.

**453.** His eyes, like the blue lotus petals, were filled with the nectar of love, and they constantly delighted his heart.

**454.** With his playful, languid glances, he stole the treasure of his mind, and thus he attained complete bliss.

**455.** Twenty-five thousand years of his childhood passed in divine and human realms, filled with happiness.

**456.** Then, after that period, King Vishvasena, with complete faith, entrusted him with the kingdom. As time passed, he enjoyed uninterrupted pleasures.

**457.** Fourteen treasures, including the wheel, emerged as the instruments of his empire, along with nine treasures, radiating with brilliance.

**458.** Among those fourteen treasures, the wheel, umbrella, sword, and staff were found in the armory, while the coin, leather, and jewel-studded crown were discovered in the treasury.

**459.** The priest, architect, general, and household manager were found in Hastinapur, while the daughters, elephants, and horses were found on Mount Vijayardha.

**460.** The nine treasures, worthy of worship, were brought by the gods, inspired by merit, from the confluence of the river and the ocean.

**461.** Having attained the sovereignty of the Chakravarti, and enjoying the ten pleasures, he remained in his palace, even after the passage of time.

**446.** Thinking this, his two feet, like new leaves, were becoming red with love and passion.

**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms like "Kalpavriksha," "Chakravarti," and "Trishatittama Parva." It also attempts to convey the poetic and devotional tone of the original text.

Page #236:
---------------------------
208
Seeing his two reflections in the mirror, while adorned with ornaments, the king wondered within himself, "What is this?" 412
Having attained knowledge, the destruction of the obscurations of knowledge and the wealth of liberation, he remembered his past lives and attained dispassion. 463
All wealth is like the shadow of a cloud, Lakshmi is like the brilliance of lightning, the body is illusory, life is like the morning shadow, constantly diminishing, loved ones are like strangers, union is like separation, increase is like decrease, and this birth is like the previous birth. 464-465
Contemplating all this, the king, free from evil desires, decided to leave his home. 466
At that time, the celestial beings came and said, "This is the time for you, O Lord, to establish this Dharma-tirtha, whose lineage has been broken for a long time." 467
The great-minded Shanti Nath, accepting their words, happily gave his kingdom to his son, Narayana. 468
Then, the king of the celestial beings, Indra, performed his initiation ceremony. Thus, the Lord, the foremost among the virtuous, leaving behind all his relatives through wise words, ascended the palanquin called Sarvartha-siddhi, carried by the celestial beings, and reached the Sahasramravana, where he sat facing north on a beautiful stone platform in the Paryakaasana posture. On the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Jyeshtha, in the evening, during the Bharani constellation, he established his practice, paid homage to the Siddhas, renounced all his possessions, and plucked out his hair, which was like the roots of afflictions, with five handfuls. Smiling with the brilliance of the Jatarupa, he attained the Jatarupa-Digambara form. Immediately, he attained purity in the Samayika and the knowledge of Manahparyaya. Indra placed his hair in a blazing casket. Many bees came to rest on his hair due to its fragrance, making it seem as if they had multiplied. Indra threw his hair towards the other side of the ocean of milk. 469-475
With Chakraayudha and others, a thousand kings, along with their retinues, attained liberation through the grace of Shanti Nath, the destroyer of afflictions. 476

Page #237:
---------------------------
## The Trishatittama Parva

**206**  The devotees, led by Indra, desired to attain the same level of restraint as the Lord. They purchased the merit, the "punya," with the currency of devotion, "bhakti," and went towards the realm of the gods. **477**

The Lord of the Universe, Shantinath, entered the city of Mandarapur, driven by the desire for food. King Sumitra, with great celebration, offered him the "prasook" meal, and thus obtained the five wonders. **478-479**

Continuing his austerities in this way, he purified the entire earth. With the desire to conquer the enemy of delusion, he thinned his passions. **480**

Accompanied by many great sages, including Chakraayudh, the glorious Lord Shantinath entered the Sahasraamravan forest. He sat beneath the Nandyaavart tree, observing the fast of "tela." **481**

On the tenth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Pausha, the most excellent Lord, seated on a "palyanka" bed, faced east. He had attained all external qualities, including "nirgrantha." He was situated in the middle of the "kshapka" category, having attained the three "karana" - "adhakarana," "apuurvakarana," and "anivrittikarana." **482-483**

He was mounted on the chariot of the fourth "charitra," known as "sukshmasampraaya." With the sword of the first "shukladhyaan," he destroyed the enemy of delusion. He became "vitraag," the holder of the "yathaakhyaat charitra." After a short time, he destroyed the "ghaatiya" with the wheel of the second "shukladhyaan." In this way, he remained in the state of "chhadmastha" for sixteen years. **484-485**

He became "nirgrantha" due to the destruction of the "mohaniya karma." He became "neeraaj" due to the absence of "jnaanavaran" and "darshanavaran." He became "vitavighna" due to the destruction of "antaraaya." He became the friend of the entire world and attained the peaceful kingdom of "kevalgyaan." **486**

At that time, a great wind of merit, known as "tirthankara," arose, stirring the ocean of gods of the four "nikaya." **487**

All beings, moved by the waves of devotion that arose within them, offered worship to the Lord of all beings, Shantinath, with offerings of jewels and other things. **488**

In his assembly, there were thirty-six "ganadharas," led by Chakraayudh. There were eight hundred "paradarshi" of the past. There were forty-one thousand eight hundred "shikshaka," and three thousand possessed pure eyes of "avadhigyaan." **489-490**

**476** Shantinath Bhagwan was observing restraint.

Page #238:
---------------------------
210
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
There were 4,000 Kevala Jnani (Omniscient) lords, adorned with 6,000 Vikriya Riddhi (powers of transformation). 491. There were 4,000 Manah Paryaya Jnani (knowers of the mind's transformations) and 4,400 Pujya Vadi (those who are worthy of worship). 492. All together, there were 62,000 Muni Raj (ascetic kings), 60,300 Aryika (female ascetics) starting with Harishena, 200,000 Shravak (laymen) starting with Surakirti, and 400,000 Shravika (laywomen) starting with Arhadasi. There were countless Devas (gods) and Devis (goddesses) and a countable number of Tiryanch (animals). 493-494. Thus, with 12 and a half ganas (groups), he taught the right Dharma (religion). 495. While wandering, when only one month of life remained, he came to Sammed Shikhar and stopped wandering, becoming immobile in Yoga. 496. On the 14th of the month of Jyeshtha, in the first part of the night, he completed his actions and, through the third Shukla Dhyana (meditation), he stopped all Yogas and removed all bonds. 497. In the time it takes to pronounce the five letters "A, Ka, Ra, Pa, and Cha," he attained the state of A-Yoga Kevali (liberated from all Yogas). Through the fourth Shukla Dhyana, he destroyed the three bodies. 498. He then went to the front of the Lok (universe) in the Bharani Nakshatra (star), where only his Gun (qualities) remained as his body. He went to the place where the infinite, spotless Siddhas (liberated souls) resided in the past. 499. At that time, four types of Devas, including Indra, free from laziness and possessing great devotion, came and, after performing the final rites - Nirvana Kalyanak (celebration of liberation) - they went to their respective places. 500. Similarly, 9,000 Muni Raj, starting with Chakraayudha, also attained Nirvana after meditating and abandoning the three bodies - Audarik (physical), Tej (subtle), and Karman (karmic). 501.
Thus, those who attained the supreme knowledge, vision, happiness, and strength, who resided in the supreme Audarik body, who attained the supreme place of wandering, who were called Arhant, and whose steadfast worship was done by Indra, may Shri Shanti Nath Bhattarak grant you all the seven supreme places. 502.

Page #239:
---------------------------
## Triṣaṣṭititama Parva
### 211

**503.** Having completely destroyed the karmas of the past, and having attained the state of being free from the cycle of birth and death, the Lord Śānti nātha, the jewel of the three worlds, became manifest in his full glory.

**504.** He who was formerly King Śrīṣeṇa, then an Ārya in the realm of excellent enjoyments, then a Deva, then a Vidyādhara, then a Deva, then Balabhadra, then a Deva, then a Cakravartī wielding the Vajra weapon, then the Lord of the Devas having attained the position of Ahmiṃdra, then a Megha ratha, then a Muni Indra worshipped by the sages, and then attained the state of Sarvārtha Siddhi, having come from there, became Lord Śānti nātha, the bestower of unparalleled peace upon the world, and may he remain a source of auspiciousness for you all for a long time.

**505-507.** She who was formerly Queen Aninditā, then came to the realm of excellent enjoyments, then became the Deva Vimala prabha, then King Śrīvijaya, then a Deva, then Ananta vīrya Nārāyaṇa, then a Nārakī, then Megha nāda, then Pratīndra, then Sahasrāyudha, then Ahmiṃdra, the possessor of immense wealth, then having fallen from there, became the intelligent Dṛḍha ratha, the younger brother of Megha ratha, then became Ahmiṃdra in the final Anuttara Vimāna, then having come from there, became the Gaṇadhara named Cakrāyudha, and finally became Akshara-Avināśī Siddha.

**508.** Thus, Cakrāyudha, knowing his own benefit and the kindness he had received, maintained harmony with his brother and attained the state of liberation, the bestower of supreme happiness, along with Lord Śānti nātha, the master of the entire world. Indeed, what is not possible in this world through the association of great souls?

**508.**  Let others in this world be as they may, but even among the Tirthankaras, who is there who has attained such immense growth in each of the twelve births? Therefore, O wise ones, if you desire peace, ...

Page #240:
---------------------------
212
Mahapuraana, Uttara Raanam
Having left behind Shantijina, let wise people meditate on Sarvottama, the one who is the best of all, 1
Always meditate on Sarva Shantijina, those who desire peace themselves. || 509 || The path to liberation, destroyed by Puru and others, was shown again by the Tirthankaras, starting with Rishabhanatha.
But no one was able to take it to the end of the famous Aavdhi. Then, the path to liberation, revealed by Lord Shantijnath, reached its own Aavdhi without any obstacle.
Therefore, O wise people, take refuge in the great teacher, Lord Shantijnath. || 510 ||
Thus ends the sixty-third chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which narrates the story of Shantijnath Tirthankara and Chakravarti.
-4444
Therefore, constantly meditate on the most excellent and benevolent Lord Shantijnath Jinendra. || 506 || The path to liberation, destroyed due to the causes of the Bhogabhoomi, was shown again and again by the Tirthankaras, starting with Rishabhanatha, but no one was able to take it to the end of the famous Aavdhi. After that, the path to liberation revealed by Lord Shantijnath reached its own Aavdhi without any obstacle. Therefore, O wise people, take refuge in the great teacher, Lord Shantijnath. Meaning - The path to liberation, established by Lord Shantijnath, has continued uninterruptedly till today. Therefore, Lord Shantijnath is the Shraddhaguru of this age. The path to liberation established by the previous fifteen Tirthankaras was destroyed from time to time. || 510 ||
Thus ends the sixty-third chapter of the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which narrates the story of Shantijnath Tirthankara and Chakravarti.
44444

1 Sarvottamam K, Kh, G, Gh. 2 Sarve Kh.

Page #241:
---------------------------
Chapter Sixty-Four

Abandoning all possessions like a discarded garment, protecting the subtle beings from the Kunthus, may Kunthunath, the guide to liberation, protect you all. ||1||

In this Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, on the southern bank of the Sita river, there is a country called Vatsa. In its city of Susima, King Simharatha ruled. He was glorious, valiant like a lion, and subdued even his many enemies with his own majesty. ||2-3||

The king, who cultivated righteous conduct and punished the entire earth, was not approached by the enemy in the form of sin, as if they were afraid of him - they remained far away. ||4||

For this king, who followed the path of scriptures and destroyed his enemies, the experience of enjoyment itself provided him with both worldly and otherworldly success. ||5||

Once, seeing a meteor fall from the sky, he thought to himself, "This meteor has fallen to destroy my enemy, the enemy of delusion." ||6||

At that very moment, he went to the sage Yati-Vrishabha, bowed to him, and listened with great devotion to the detailed explanation of the principles of Dharma given by him. ||7||

He, the wise one, thought, "I was bound by delusion, this meteor has informed me of danger." With this thought, desiring to abandon delusion, he quickly entrusted the burden of his kingdom to his son, along with many kings, and embraced restraint. ||8||

Becoming a renunciant, he attained the knowledge of the eleven limbs and, through the sixteen causes of contemplation, bound himself to the auspicious nature of the Tirthankara. At the end of his life, he attained Samadhi-death and was born in the final, unsurpassed, Sarvartha-siddhi plane. ||9-10||

There, with great curiosity, he experienced the uninvestigated, mental bliss, which was worthy of respect even for the sages and arose from detachment. ||11||

In this Jambudvipa, in the Kuru-jangala region of the Bharat Kshetra, there is a city called Hastinapur.

Page #242:
---------------------------
214
Mahapuraana, Uttarapuraana: King Surendrasena, the ruler of the Kaurava dynasty, was of the Kashyapa gotra. His queen was Shreekantā, who was a devoted wife and had received blessings from the gods in the form of rain of jewels and other offerings. 12-13

On the tenth day of the dark fortnight of Shraavana, in the western part of the night, during the Krittika constellation, when the time of the demise of the great god Sarvarthasiddhi was approaching, Shreekantā saw sixteen auspicious dreams, one of which was of an elephant entering her mouth. 14-15

Upon hearing the auspicious sounds of the morning, she woke up, performed her daily rituals, bathed, adorned herself with auspicious ornaments, and surrounded by a few trusted people, she illuminated the royal court like lightning, resembling another Lakshmi. With due respect, she sat on the half-seat of her husband. She narrated all the dreams to her husband, who was a master of interpreting dreams, and inquired about their meaning. As she learned the auspicious interpretations of the dreams, her lotus-like face blossomed like a lotus touched by the rays of the sun. 16-19

At that very moment, the gods performed the auspicious ceremony of conception for King Surendrasena and Queen Shreekantā, offered various forms of worship, and departed after being pleased. 20

Just as a conch shell becomes pregnant with a pearl, Queen Shreekantā became pregnant with a son. And just as the line of clouds adorned with the moon shines brightly, Queen Shreekantā, carrying her son in her womb, shone brightly. 21

On the first day of the bright fortnight of Vaisakha, after nine months had passed, Queen Shreekantā gave birth to her son in the Agni yoga, just as the moon rises in the west. 22

At that time, all the gods, led by Indra, arrived and took the child to Mount Sumeru. They bathed him in the waters of the Milky Ocean, adorned him with ornaments, named him Kunthu, and returned him to his parents. Finally, everyone went back to their respective places. 23-25

After the liberation of Shantinatha Tirthankara, when half a Paly had passed, the ocean of merit, Shri Kunthunatha Bhagavan, was born. His lifespan was also included in this interval. 25

His lifespan was ninety thousand years, his body was thirty-five Dhanus high, and his complexion was like polished gold. 26

After twenty-three thousand seven hundred and fifty years of his childhood, he attained kingship.

Page #243:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Fourth Chapter
215
On his birthday, he received the fortune of a Chakravarti, and enjoyed the ten types of pleasures without any obstacles, continuously. ||28||
United with the six-limbed army, he sometimes went to the forest to play. After playing freely for a long time, he returned to the city. ||29||
While observing a Muni engaged in the Attap Yoga, he pointed his index finger towards his minister and said, "Look, look." ||30||
Seeing the Muni, the minister bowed his head in devotion and asked, "O Lord! What fruit will this Muni attain by performing such difficult austerities?" ||31||
Smiling, the Chakravarti Kunthunath replied, "This Muni will attain Nirvana by destroying his karmas in this very birth. If he is unable to attain Nirvana, he will enjoy the pleasures and wealth of Indra and Chakravarti, and eventually attain the eternal state of liberation." ||32-33||
"He who does not renounce attachment will continue to wander in the cycle of birth and death." Thus, the omniscient Lord Kunthunath explained the causes of liberation and the cycle of birth and death. ||34||
He spent as much time as a Chakravarti as he had spent as a Mandalika, enjoying a happy life. ||35||
Then, remembering his previous births, the wise Lord Kunthunath, the best among the wise, renounced the pleasures of the kingdom, desiring to attain the bliss of Nirvana. ||36||
The Sarasvat and other celestial beings came and praised him with great respect. He entrusted the burden of the kingdom to his son and received the celebration of the Diksha Kalyanak, performed by the Indras. Then, he boarded the palanquin called Vijaya, which was fit for being carried by the gods, and went to the Sahetuk forest. There, he took the vow of Tela and received Diksha on the first day of the bright fortnight of Vaisakha, on the day of his birth, in the Kritika constellation, in the evening, along with a thousand kings. At that time, he attained the knowledge of Manahparyaya. The next day, he went to Hastinapur, where King Dharmamitra offered him food and received the Pancha-Ascharya. Thus, he spent sixteen years performing severe austerities. ||37-41||
One day,
1. The reading "Chakrilakshmi" seems to be correct.
2. The reading "Nipratipam" should be used.
3. "Karanam" should be added.
4. "Jin Diksha" should be added.

Page #244:
---------------------------
216
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapuraana, on the third day of the Krittika constellation, he attained liberation. At that time, all the gods came together in harmony and joy. ||43|| They prayed and performed the fourth auspicious puja. There were thirty-five Ganadharas, starting with the self-born one. ||44|| There were seven hundred Muni-Rajas, the best of the knowers of the past. There were fifteen thousand one hundred and fifty Mahavedi teachers, with a clear intention. ||45|| There were two thousand five hundred who had attained the knowledge of the third stage, pure and clear. There were three thousand two hundred who were radiant with the knowledge of liberation, with two zeros and two vahus. ||46|| There were five thousand one hundred who were adorned with the knowledge of the two-sense-organ stage, with two zeros and one sense-organ. There were three thousand three hundred who were holders of the fourth knowledge. ||47|| There were fifty-two thousand who were known as the best debaters. All of them, sixty thousand Muni-Rajas, were his followers. ||48|| There were sixty thousand three hundred and fifty Aryikas, starting with the Bhavitta. There were three hundred thousand Shravikas and two hundred thousand Shravakas. There were countless gods and goddesses, and a countable number of Tiryanchas. ||49|| The Lord, through the divine sound, preached Dharma to all of them, while wandering. ||50|| After wandering through many lands, when his lifespan was reduced to one month, he reached Sammed Shikhar. There, with a thousand Munis, he took on the form of a statue. ||51|| On the first day of the bright fortnight of Vaisakha, in the early part of the night, when the Krittika constellation was rising, he uprooted all his karmas and attained the supreme state. Now he was free from the stain of karma. The gods performed the puja of his Nirvana-Kalyanak. His supreme state was filled with pure knowledge and detachment, and was imperishable. ||53||

The king, Simharatha, who was known as Prithutapa, was a master of all accomplishments. He was blessed with two Kalyanakas, and was the chief of the six armies and the three worlds. He had attained the eight qualities, and was radiant like a jewel on the peak of the three worlds. His glory was unshakable, and he was a source of prosperity for all directions. ||54||

The Lord, who was pure, took the vow of Tela and sat under the Til tree in the forest where he took his initiation. There, on the third day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, in the evening, in the Krittika constellation, he attained liberation. At that time, all the gods came together in joy. They prayed and performed the fourth auspicious puja. There were thirty-five Ganadharas, starting with the self-born one. ||44|| There were seven hundred Muni-Rajas, the best of the knowers of the past. There were fifteen thousand one hundred and fifty Mahavedi teachers, with a clear intention. ||45|| There were two thousand five hundred who had attained the knowledge of the third stage, pure and clear. There were three thousand two hundred who were radiant with the knowledge of liberation, with two zeros and two vahus. ||46|| There were five thousand one hundred who were adorned with the knowledge of the two-sense-organ stage, with two zeros and one sense-organ. There were three thousand three hundred who were holders of the fourth knowledge. ||47|| There were fifty-two thousand who were known as the best debaters. All of them, sixty thousand Muni-Rajas, were his followers. ||48|| There were sixty thousand three hundred and fifty Aryikas, starting with the Bhavitta. There were three hundred thousand Shravikas and two hundred thousand Shravakas. There were countless gods and goddesses, and a countable number of Tiryanchas. ||49|| The Lord, through the divine sound, preached Dharma to all of them, while wandering. ||50|| After wandering through many lands, when his lifespan was reduced to one month, he reached Sammed Shikhar. There, with a thousand Munis, he took on the form of a statue. ||51|| On the first day of the bright fortnight of Vaisakha, in the early part of the night, when the Krittika constellation was rising, he uprooted all his karmas and attained the supreme state. Now he was free from the stain of karma. The gods performed the puja of his Nirvana-Kalyanak. His supreme state was filled with pure knowledge and detachment, and was imperishable. ||53||

The king, Simharatha, who was known as Prithutapa, was a master of all accomplishments. He was blessed with two Kalyanakas, and was the chief of the six armies and the three worlds. He had attained the eight qualities, and was radiant like a jewel on the peak of the three worlds. His glory was unshakable, and he was a source of prosperity for all directions. ||54||

Page #245:
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixty-Four

**The Deities of the Heavens**

Whose bodily radiance encompasses all the gods, including Indra,
Whose knowledge-light encompasses the entire sky, along with the five elements.

He, the abode of Lakshmi, who has dispelled the pervasive darkness of ignorance,
May the Lord Kunthunatha, the possessor of infinite virtues, show you the path to liberation. || 55 ||

Thus ends the sixty-fourth chapter of the **Kunthunatha Tirthankara Purana**, a part of the **Trishatilakṣaṇa Mahāpurāṇa**, composed by the venerable **Gunabhadra Acharya**, which narrates the story of the **Kunthunatha Tirthankara** and **Chakravarti**. || 64 ||

**May Lord Kunthunatha grant you all eternal liberation and the wealth of liberation.** || 54 ||

Page #246:
---------------------------
The 56th Chapter

The essence of the essence, the supreme essence, is the greatness of the Naranaath. It is the cause of the liberation from the ocean of the deep and insubstantial world. ||1||

In the Jambudvipa, on the northern bank of the Sita river, there is a country called Kachchha. In its city of Kshemapura, there reigned a king named Dhanapati. He was the protector of his people and beloved by them. The earth, like a cow, always fulfilled his desires, being filled with milk. ||2-3||

This king was naturally endowed with two qualities: he was generous even without being asked, and he was industrious even without enemies. ||4||

In his kingdom, both the king and the people followed their respective duties and enjoyed the three goals of life. Therefore, there was never any transgression of dharma. ||5||

One day, the king drank the divine nectar of dharma, which had arisen from the divine sound of the Ainnandan Tirthankara. This made him renounce worldly pleasures and he gave his kingdom to his son. He then quickly embraced the Jain monastic life, which ends birth and death. ||6-7||

He crossed the ocean of eleven angas and bound himself to the meritorious karma of becoming a Tirthankara through the sixteen causes of karma. Finally, through the practice of the Praayopgamana, he attained the position of Ahminndra in the Jayanta Vimana. There, his lifespan was the size of thirty-three oceans, his body was one hand tall, he had both types of white leshya (subtle matter), he breathed once every sixteen and a half months, and he consumed the mental, amrita-like food once every thirty-three thousand years. He was a crosser of the ocean of pleasure without any investigation, and through his own knowledge of the avadhi, he knew the extent of the objects within the lokanadi (the network of the universe). ||8-11||

The extent of his avadhi knowledge was the same as the extent of his light, power, and the power of his actions. His passions, like attachment and aversion, were completely pacified, and liberation was near. ||12||

He enjoyed the best of pleasures, which arose from the arising of the seven vedaniyas (types of feelings). He remained in this state until the end of his life. ||13||

Now, you all should serve and take refuge in the Naranaath Tirthankara, who is the cause of liberation from the deep and insubstantial ocean of the world, who is worshipped by many kings, and who is the most excellent. ||1||

Page #247:
---------------------------
The 56th Chapter

In this island, Bharat Kshetra, there is a country called Kuru Jangala. In its city of Hastinapur, there ruled a king named Sudarshan, born in the Soma dynasty, belonging to the Kashyap gotra. His beloved queen, more precious than life itself, was Mitra Sena.  || 14-15 ||

When the time came for the soul of the Dhanapati, Jayant, to descend from heaven as the Ahamindra, Queen Mitra Sena, having received divine honors like a shower of jewels, was overjoyed. On the third day of the dark fortnight of the month of Falgun, in the constellation of Revati, in the last watch of the night, she saw sixteen dreams. As soon as dawn broke, she asked her husband, who was a knower of omens, about the meaning of these dreams.  || 16-17 ||

Having heard the interpretation of the dreams from her husband, the queen, who was destined to possess supreme glory, was filled with such joy as if she had received the kingdom of the three worlds.  || 18 ||

At that time, the queen Mitra Sena, whose womb was blessed by Indra and other gods, was completely satisfied, free from pride, eternally beautiful, with a gentle face, and pure. She was praised by the goddesses with appropriate hymns, and she carried in her womb a great blessing for the world, like a cloud carrying rain.  || 19-20 ||

On the fourteenth day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, in the Pushya constellation, she gave birth to a son adorned with three kinds of knowledge.  || 21 ||

To describe the celebration of his birth, it is enough to say that all the great gods, along with their consorts, emptied heaven and came here to participate.  || 22 ||

To say that the poor, the helpless, and the beggars were satisfied at that time is a small thing, for the three worlds were filled with joy.  || 23 ||

After the Tirthankara Kunthunatha's Tirtha, when one-fourth of a thousand crore years of the Paly had passed, the Lord Aranatha was born. His lifespan was included in this interval. The Lord Aranatha had a glorious lifespan of eighty-four thousand years, his body was thirty bows tall, his complexion was like gold, he was the epitome of beauty, and the greatest source of good fortune. Looking at him, one wondered if he was an ocean of beauty or a mansion of beauty, whether beauty was born in him or he was born in beauty, or whether he was himself beauty personified.  || 24-27 ||

Thus, having enjoyed the pleasures he had attained, he reached the end of his lifespan and was about to depart from it.  || 13 ||

Then, in this same Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a country called Kuru Jangala. In its city of Hastinapur, there ruled a king named Sudarshan, born in the Soma dynasty, belonging to the Kashyap gotra. His beloved queen, more precious than life itself, was Mitra Sena.  || 14-15 ||

Page #248:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
## Translation:

He, who was full of virtues, was increasing along with Lakshmi, like a wish-fulfilling tree, dispelling the doubts of the people. || 28 || After twenty-one thousand years of his childhood, he attained the kingdom fit for a Mandalika. || 29 || When the same amount of time passed in Savati, he attained the position of a Chakravarti, enjoying all the pleasures in the third part of his lifespan. || 30 || One day, seeing the sudden disappearance of the autumn clouds, he attained the knowledge of his birth's purpose, the supreme knowledge. || 31 || Being enlightened by the advice of the celestial beings, he gave the kingdom to his son, Arvind Kumar, and mounted the celestial palanquin, Vijayanti, and went to the forest of Sahu. || 32 || He took the initiation on the tenth day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, in the constellation Revati, with the sixth fast, along with a thousand kings. || 33 || He became a holder of four knowledges as soon as he took the initiation. || 34 || While performing austerities, he went to Chakrapur on the day of Parana, where he was offered food by the king, Aparajit, who was radiant like gold, and attained the five wonders. || 35 || Sixteen years passed in the state of Chhadabhastha for the Muni. || 36 || Then, in the month of Kartik, on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight, in the constellation Revati, in the afternoon, under a mango tree, he took the initiation with the sixth fast, destroyed his destructive karmas, and attained the Arhathood. || 37 || The gods gathered together and worshipped him on the occasion of the fourth auspicious event. || 38 || There were thirty Ganadharas, led by Kummarya, six hundred and ten, who knew the fourteen Angas, and fourteen who knew the fourteen Purvas. || 39 || There were thirty-five thousand eight hundred and thirty-five teachers, who possessed subtle intellect. || 39 || There were twenty-eight hundred who knew the Avadhi knowledge, and the same number who knew the Kevala knowledge. || 40 || There were forty-nine hundred who possessed the Vikriya Riddhi, and twenty hundred and fifty-five who knew the Manahparyaya knowledge. || 41 || There were sixteen hundred who were the best debaters. || 42 || In total, there were fifty thousand Munis with him. || 42 || There were sixty thousand Aryikas, led by Yakshilla, one lakh sixty thousand Shravakas, three lakh Shravikas, countless gods, and a countable number of Tiryanchas. || 43 || 

Thus, surrounded by these twelve assemblies, the supremely intelligent Lord...

Page #249:
---------------------------
The 56th Chapter
221
The gods mentioned earlier are specified as three lakhs in number. The number of Tiryanchas is also mentioned as twelve ganas. || 44 ||
For the purpose of teaching Dharma, the wise one (Arhat) wandered through many countries. When only one month of his life remained, he ascended the peak of Sammed Shikhar with a thousand monks and took the image vow. On the night of the new moon of Chaitra, in the constellation of Revati, he attained liberation in the early part of the night. || 45-46 ||
At that time, the Indra came and performed the Nirvana Kalyanak puja. They praised him with hundreds of hymns with devotion and then all of them went to their respective places. || 47 ||
**Shardaulvikridit**
He who abandoned his Sudarshan Chakra, like a potter's wheel, to make the earth a wheel, and abandoned his kingdom, like a water carrier, to attain the supreme Dharma Chakra.
May the Arhat, who destroys the enemy of sin, protect you all, who are overwhelmed by the burden of devotion, and who are afraid of the world, forever. || 48 ||
**Vasantatilaka Vritta**
He who attained purity by destroying the eighteen defects, along with their causes, caused by hunger, thirst, fear, and other great karmas, who was the one Guru of the three worlds, and who was the most excellent, may the eighteenth Tirthankara, Arhat, grant you liberation soon. || 49 ||
**Shardaulvikridit**
He who was first a great king named Dhanapati, then a master of vows, a monk, then the lord of the happy Ahamindra, who adorned the front part of heaven, then the lord of the six continents, the ruler of fourteen jewels and nine treasures, a Chakravarti, and finally the lord of the three worlds, the Arhat, may he, the most excellent eighteenth Tirthankara, purify you all who are his devotees, for a long time. || 50 ||
Then, in the same Tirtha of Arhat Bhagwan, there was a Chakravarti named Subhauma. He was the king of the earth in his third birth. || 51 ||
Arhat wandered through many countries to teach Dharma. When only one month of his life remained, he ascended the peak of Sammed Shikhar with a thousand monks and took the image vow. On the night of the new moon of Chaitra, in the constellation of Revati, he attained liberation in the early part of the night. || 43-46 ||
At that time, Indra came and performed the Nirvana Kalyanak puja. They praised him with hundreds of hymns with devotion and then all of them went to their respective places. || 47 ||
He who abandoned his Sudarshan Chakra, like a potter's wheel, to make the earth a wheel, and abandoned his kingdom, like a water carrier, to attain the supreme Dharma Chakra.
May the Arhat, who destroys the enemy of sin, protect you all, who are overwhelmed by the burden of devotion, and who are afraid of the world, forever. || 48 ||
He who attained purity by destroying the eighteen defects, along with their causes, caused by hunger, thirst, fear, and other great karmas, who was the one Guru of the three worlds, and who was the most excellent, may the eighteenth Tirthankara, Arhat, grant you liberation soon. || 49 ||
He who was first a great king named Dhanapati, then a master of vows, a monk, then the lord of the happy Ahamindra, who adorned the front part of heaven, then the lord of the six continents, the ruler of fourteen jewels and nine treasures, a Chakravarti, and finally the lord of the three worlds, the Arhat, may he, the most excellent eighteenth Tirthankara, purify you all who are his devotees, for a long time. || 50 ||
Then, in the same Tirtha of Arhat Bhagwan, there was a Chakravarti named Subhauma. He was the king of the earth in his third birth. || 51 ||
1. Vritto Lo.
2. Madhu.
3. Tritiya Lo.

Page #250:
---------------------------
222
In the Mahapurana, in the Uttara Purana, there was a king named Bhupala. He was defeated in a battle by ambitious kings. His pride was shattered, and he became deeply detached from the world. He took Jain initiation from a guru named Sambhuta. While performing austerities, he made a resolution to become a Chakravarti. This resolution was born out of his attachment to worldly pleasures. His austerities were thus tainted by his mind, just as milk is tainted by poison. 52-54
He continued to perform severe austerities. At the end of his life, he died in a state of equanimity, having renounced the world, and was reborn in the Maha Shukra heaven. 55
There, he enjoyed a life of happiness for sixteen oceans of years. Meanwhile, in this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a country called Kaushala, full of virtues. In its city of Ayodhya, the Ikshvaku king Sahasrabahu ruled. His beloved queen was named Chitramati. She was the daughter of Parata, the king of Kanyakubja. By the grace of great merit, she gave birth to a son named Kritaviradhip. 56-58
As he grew, another story is told. Sahasrabahu's uncle, Shatabindu, had a son named Jamadagni, born to his wife, Shrimati. Shrimati was the sister of King Parata. Jamadagni's mother died when he was young, so he became a renunciate and performed the Panchagni tapas. 59-60
Another story is related. There was a king named Dridgrahi. He had an unbreakable friendship with a Brahmin named Harisharma. Their time passed in this way. One day, Dridgrahi took Jain vows, and Harisharma also became an ascetic. At the end of his life, Harisharma died and was reborn in the Jyotirloka, becoming a Jyotishi deva. Dridgrahi was reborn in the Saudharma heaven. With his eyes of knowledge, he saw that his friend Harisharma had been reborn in the Jyotirloka due to his false beliefs. Therefore, he came to guide him towards the proper Jain Dharma. 61-64
Seeing Harisharma's soul, Dridgrahi's soul said, "You have been born in this despicable state because of your false beliefs. And 
1. Praapto'l. 2 Sa bhuta-l. 3 Sudhil 4 Sukhamaap sahk. 5 Kaushalyakhye k., gh. 6 Kanyakubja l. 7 Parataavyasya k., gh. 8 Nivedaattaapaso m., l. 6 Dyotishaam k., 50, Jyotishe l. 10 Utkrishtashuddha l.

Page #251:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Sixth Chapter
223

Therefore, he said, "Embrace the path of liberation."  From doubt about the purity of the ascetics' austerities, the ascetic asked, "Why are the austerities of the ascetics impure?"  

The other one replied, "Come, I will show you the earth."  After discussing this, they both assumed the forms of a male and female sparrow.  

They took refuge in the long beard and mustache of Jamadagni Muni.  After staying there for some time, the omniscient male sparrow, who knew illusion, spoke to the female sparrow, who was a devotee of astrology, "My dear, I will go to the other forest and return soon.  Wait for me here."  

The female sparrow replied, "I don't trust you.  If you are going, then swear to me."  

The male sparrow said, "What do you want from me?  I will swear to you by any of the five sins."  

The female sparrow said, "I don't want any of the five sins.  Swear to me that if I don't return, I will attain the state of this ascetic."  

"My dear, if you will give me this oath, I will let you go.  Otherwise, I will not."  Hearing this, the male sparrow said, "Leave that, tell me what else you want.  I will swear by that."  

Hearing this conversation between the male and female sparrow, the ascetic was filled with anger.  His eyes rolled.  He grabbed both the birds with his hands, intending to kill them.  He said, "Why did you not desire the future world that I have attained through my arduous austerities?"  

The male sparrow said, "Don't be angry.  Your kindness will be lost by this anger.  Is a little bit of buttermilk lost by a little bit of sour milk?  Listen, what is the reason for your misfortune, even though you have been performing severe austerities for a long time?"  

"You have been practicing celibacy since childhood.  This is for the destruction of progeny.  What is the fate of a man who destroys progeny, except hell?"  

"Have you not heard the Vedic saying, 'There is no fate for a childless man'?  Why are you suffering with such a dull mind without thinking?"  

I have attained the excellent divine equivalent due to the right faith.

Page #252:
---------------------------
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

Hearing his words, the ascetic, convinced of his foolishness, thought, "This is the nature of the ignorance of those who are attached to women."  Leaving the two birds, thinking, "These two are my benefactors," the foolish ascetic, cheated by the two gods, went towards the king of Kubja, Parata.  As if proclaiming, "Ignorance-based renunciation is not stable," he saw his maternal uncle Parata.  He indicated his arrival for the sake of a girl, simply by his appearance.  Seeing the two seats, he sat on the seat with attachment.  He informed the king of the circumstances of his arrival.  Hearing this, the king, filled with sorrow, said, "May this ignorance be cursed, cursed!"  He said, "I have a hundred daughters here, whichever one desires you, she shall be yours."  Seeing the daughters, the ascetic went towards them.  Thinking him to be a half-burnt corpse, due to his body being burnt by penance, some of the girls fled in disgust, and some were terrified.  He, too, was afflicted by shame, and leaving all the girls, he went towards a young girl who was playing in the dust.  Showing her a banana fruit, he said, "Do you desire me?"  She said, "Yes, I desire you."  He went to the king and said, "This girl desires me."  Thus, taking the girl with him, he went towards the forest.  He was condemned by people at every step, being extremely humble and foolish.  He named the girl Renuki and married her.  From that time onwards, the saying became famous, "This is the way of life - to practice penance with women."  Just as there are two types of knowledge, knowledge of the special characteristics of faith, namely, intellectual knowledge and scriptural knowledge, or two types of penance of a sage, namely, external penance and internal penance, in the same way, two praiseworthy sons, Indra and Shvetarama, were born to Jamadagni.  These two sons seemed to be like the desires of people for pleasure and wealth, or like the acquired policy and prowess.  Thus, in due course, the sage went to another place.  His elder brother, Ariya, went to Renuki's house, desiring to see her.

Page #253:
---------------------------
225
The sixty-sixth chapter of the Parva, as per the proper procedure, the Muni was prompted by Bhartri. O venerable one! What wealth did you give me at the time of my marriage? || 9 ||  
Then, she said, "At that time, I did not give anything. Now, O blessed one, I give you something that is rare even in the three worlds. Accept it. By means of it, you will attain the lineage of happiness. It is Samyaktva, adorned with vows and the garland of conduct." || 15 || 
Having said this, she was inspired by his words, like the time itself. The Muni, being pleased, said, "I have accepted your Samyagdarshan." || 97 || 
He gave her the knowledge of the Kamadhenu, which grants desired objects, along with a mat and an axe. || 18 || 
Then, on another day, her father, Sahasrabahu, went to the hermitage with his son, Kritavira. Being a brother, Jamadagni said to Sahasrabahu, "You should eat and then go." Saying this, Jamadagni fed him. Kritavira asked his younger sister, "How do you get such food in this hermitage, when even in the houses of kings, such ingredients are not available?" || 99 || 
In response, Renuki told him the whole story of the acquisition of the Kamadhenu knowledge, etc. Being possessed by the rise of delusion, that ungrateful Kritavira asked Renuki for that Kamadhenu knowledge. Renuki said, "O father! This Kamadhenu is the Homadhenu of your Guru, Jamadagni, of your Varna-Ashramas. Therefore, your request is not appropriate." || 102 || 
Upon hearing this, he became enraged. He said in a fit of anger, "Whatever wealth is superior in the world is fit for kings. Such a Kamadhenu is not fit to be enjoyed by those who eat roots, tubers, and fruits." || 104 || 
Saying this, he forcibly took the Kamadhenu and started to leave. Jamadagni, the Rishi, stood in front of him to stop him. The wicked king, Kritavira, killed Jamadagni and, transgressing his path, went towards the city. On the other hand, Renuki, with a shrunken belly, started crying due to the death of her husband. Later, when her two sons returned from the forest, carrying flowers, roots, tubers, and fruits, they were surprised and asked, "What is this?" || 105-106 || 
They understood everything properly. The two brothers, who possessed natural valor, first consoled their grief-stricken mother.

Page #254:
---------------------------
226
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
"Having asked and learned all this, both brothers, filled with anger and grief, said to each other, "We have heard that even death in a cow-grazing field is a cause of merit. Or, let that be. Who can bear the death of their father?" Having said this, all the Muni-Kumaras, filled with affection, followed them. || 108-110 ||

Following the same path that King Sahasrabahu and Kritaveera had taken, they reached the outskirts of Ayodhya. There, having fought a battle with Kritaveera, they killed King Sahasrabahu and entered the city at dusk. It is right, for those who engage in unrighteous actions, the fruits of their deeds, like the poison of Halahala, quickly bring forth a succession of unbearable sorrows. 

Meanwhile, the Shaandilya Taapas, the elder brother of Queen Chitramati, learned that Parashurama was eager to destroy all the descendants of Sahasrabahu, and that Queen Chitramati, due to the poison of the curse, had become pregnant by the Deva, the embodiment of the great Shukra, who had been born in heaven. In other words, the said Deva had entered the womb of Queen Chitramati. As soon as Shaandilya learned of this, he took his sister Chitramati and left secretly. He went to the Nirgrantha Muni named Subandhu and told him everything. "Arya! There is no one at my monastery, so I will go there and come back. Until I return, this Devi will stay here." Saying this, he left Chitramati with Subandhu Muni and went elsewhere. || 111-117 ||

Meanwhile, Queen Chitramati gave birth to a son. Considering that this child was the future Chakravarti of the Bharata region, the forest-deities immediately picked him up. Thus, the child, protected by the forest-deities, grew up slowly. || 118-119 ||

When a few days had passed, one day the Queen asked the Muni, "Swami! This child was born while embracing the earth, so please, by your grace, tell me about his auspicious and inauspicious signs." At the Queen's request, the Muni said, "Amba! This child will surely become a Chakravarti in his sixteenth year. And this will be the sign of his becoming a Chakravarti: this child will eat hot cakes taken from the middle of the ghee in a frying pan placed on a burning stove." || 120-122 ||

The Queen was satisfied with the Muni's words, which were full of logic. Then, the two sharp-edged swordsmen, who had made their flags from the skin of a tiger, said to each other, "We have heard in the scriptures that even death in a cow-grazing field is a cause of merit. Or, let that be. Who can bear the death of their father?" Having said this, all the Muni-Kumaras, filled with affection, followed them. || 107-110 ||

Page #255:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Fifth Chapter

227

This is the certain knowledge of the future cycle. Therefore, do not fear, O Queen, said the compassionate Subandhu Muni to the sorrowful Queen Chitramati. 123

Subandhu Muni, full of compassion, greatly comforted the Queen. Then, her elder brother, the ascetic Shandilya, came and took her to his home. 124

This child was born by touching the earth, therefore, Shandilya celebrated a grand festival and lovingly named him Subhauma. 125

There, he continuously studied all the scriptures with practical applications. He grew up secretly, receiving instruction. 126

Meanwhile, the two sons of Renuki, whose fierce prowess was growing, had eradicated the Kshatriya lineage twenty-one times. 127

With the desire to collect the heads of all the kings slain by their own hands, they bound them in stone pillars, filled with hatred for their father's death. 128

Thus, both brothers together enjoyed the sovereignty of the entire earth. 129

One day, the expert in omens, Nimittakushala, told King Indraram, the lord of the earth, "Your enemy has been born. Take action against him. Do you want to know how to be sure? I will tell you. The one for whom the teeth of the slain kings, which you have collected, will become food, is your enemy." 130

Hearing the words of the expert in omens, King Indraram pondered in his mind. He then established a charitable kitchen with excellent food. 132

He proclaimed, "Let those who desire food come here. They will be shown the teeth kept in a vessel and then fed." 133

Thus, to test his enemy, he began to feed many men every day through his servants. 134

Subhauma learned from his mother about his father's death. Indeed, the time for him to become the emperor had arrived. He also knew all the secrets of his hidden life, as instructed by the highly knowledgeable Subandhu Muni. 135

Therefore, disguised as an ascetic, he set out for Ayodhya with a group of princes who understood his secrets. 136

Indeed, auspicious fate inspires fortunate men at the right time. 137

Page #256:
---------------------------
228
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, there was great wailing of the deities residing in Saketa. The earth trembled, and stars were seen in the daytime in the city. || 130 || "That Tathagata Kumar has come to the Shala to eat. Calling him, seat him on a high seat, the seat of the slain." || 139 ||  Due to his influence, those appointed showed him teeth. Seeing that, the attendants said, "That food is rice." || 140 ||  He also recognized it and said, "Let him be brought." He ordered his servants, who were strong. They reached him and said, "You have been called by the king, so come quickly." He replied, "I do not take employment like you, so why should I go to him? You go." Saying this, he rebuked them. Due to his influence, all the servants were afflicted with a fever of fear, and they all went to their respective places. || 141-143 ||  Hearing this, Parashurama became very angry. He came, ready for war. Seeing him come, Subhauma also went towards him. || 144 ||  Parashurama ordered his army to fight with him. But Vyantaradeva, the ruler of the Bharat Kshetra, who had protected Subhauma Kumar from birth, also protected him at that time. Therefore, Parashurama's army could not stand before him. Seeing this, Parashurama himself sent his elephant towards Subhauma. But at that very moment, a Gandharaja-madounmatta elephant appeared for Subhauma. Not only that, a divine chakra-ratna, protected by a thousand deities and a means of becoming a Chakravarti, also appeared nearby. It is right, because what does not happen in the face of destiny? Just as the sun rises over the eastern region, so too did Subhauma Kumar emerge, mounted on that Gajendra. He was very adorned, holding a chakra with a thousand blades in his hand. Seeing him, Parashurama became very angry and came forward to kill Subhauma. || 145-149 ||  Subhauma Kumar also sent him to the other world with the chakra - killed him, and immediately declared a proclamation of safety for the remaining army. || 150 ||
After the Arnatha Tirthankara, two hundred crore thirty-two years passed, and Subhauma became a Chakravarti.

Page #257:
---------------------------
Chapter Fifty-Six
226
He was the eighth emperor among the emperors, who had destroyed all his enemies. His lifespan was sixty thousand years, his height was twenty-eight bows, his complexion was like gold, he was prosperous, he was the lion of the Ikshvaku dynasty, he was adorned with auspicious signs like the chakra, which were very clear. 152-153
Then the remaining jewels and the nine treasures also appeared. This emperor, having obtained the sovereignty of the six continents, became prominent. 154
Having attained the position of emperor, he enjoyed the ten types of pleasures for a long time, just as Indra enjoys divine pleasures in heaven. 155
He had a cook named Amritarasayana, who was his well-wisher. One day, he happily served him a dish called Rasayana. 156
The emperor did not consider the qualities of the dish, but was angered by just hearing its name. In the meantime, the cook's enemy instigated the king, who, in anger, punished the cook. He punished him so severely that the cook was about to die from the punishment. He became very angry and decided that he would definitely kill this king. Due to a little bit of merit, he died and became a god in the world of light, possessing the eyes of knowledge of the destruction of the world. Remembering his past enmity, he became angry and desired to kill the king. 157-158
Seeing that the king was greedy for his tongue, he assumed the form of a merchant and served the king every day by giving him sweet fruits. 160
One day, the god said, "Your Majesty, those fruits are now finished." The king said, "If they are finished, then go and bring those fruits again." 161
The god replied, "Those fruits cannot be brought. First, I worshipped the goddess who is the mistress of that forest and obtained some fruits." 162
"If you are attached to those fruits, if you like them very much, then come with me to that forest yourself and eat those fruits as you wish." 163
The king, believing his deceitful words, agreed to go with him. It is true that the thinking power of those who have lost their merit is destroyed. 164
Although the ministers had warned the king, "You are becoming greedy for your tongue like a fish, abandon this kingdom,"

Page #258:
---------------------------
## The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

The foolish one, disregarding the advice, entered the ocean by boat. At that time, all the treasures, each guarded by a thousand Yaksha, left his house. Knowing this, the merchant-enemy, disguised as a merchant, took his enemy king to the middle of the ocean. There, he revealed his previous birth as the king's cook, uttered many harsh words, and killed him in a cruel and unusual way, fulfilling his past enmity. 

Even the great emperor Subhauma, at the end of his life, became absorbed in fierce meditation and was born in hell. What cannot happen due to foolishness? 

Sahastrabahu, due to greed, along with his son, was born as a lower animal. The two sons of Jamadagni, who were devoted to violence, were born in hell. 

Therefore, wise people abandon both attachment and aversion. By abandoning them, wise people attain the highest state in the present, past, and future.

## Vasantatilaka

Even though he was like a lion, a single king, the eighth emperor Subhauma, who ruled the entire earth, killed the two sons of Jamadagni, who had killed his father. He illuminated all directions with his glory, but due to his bad conduct, he was born in hell.

The life of the emperor Subhauma was first as a king named Bhupala. Then, he performed severe austerities and became the god Maha Shukra in heaven, with a lifespan of sixteen oceans. From there, he fell and became the emperor Subhauma, who killed Parashurama, and finally, he became the lord of hell.

In the same time period, Nandishena Balabhadra and Pundarika Narayana were born as princes. The life of Pundarika, in the third existence, performed austerities with Shalya, under the guidance of Suketu, and at the end of his life, he became a god in heaven. From there, he fell, and after six hundred crore years, he became the emperor Subhauma.

Page #259:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Sixth Chapter
231
The valiant god, Vaijayanya, was born to Lakshmi-mati, and the valiant,  Pundarika, was born to her. Their lifespan was sixty-six thousand years, their height twenty-six dhanus, and their lifespan was fixed. Due to the merit accumulated from their austerities, they enjoyed their lifespan happily. || 174-178 ||
One day, the king of Indrapura, Upendra-sena, gave his daughter, Padmavati, to Pundarika. || 179 ||
Then, the wicked Suketa, who was an enemy in a previous birth, wandered through many births according to the karma he had accumulated. Finally, he accumulated some merit and became the lord of Chakra-pura, a king who subdued the earth. His radiance was like the sun in the summer. He was so radiant that he could not tolerate the radiance of others. When he heard of the marriage of Pundarika and Padmavati, he was enraged. He prepared his entire army, ready to kill his enemies, more merciless than the denizens of hell, and invincible. He set out to kill Pundarika. || 180-183 ||
Nishumbha, whose radiance was constantly increasing, fought Pundarika for a long time in many ways. Finally, he was killed by Pundarika's chakra-shaped weapon and fell into hell. || 184 ||
Like the sun and the moon, or like two guardians united, they both, with their radiance pervading the sky, protected the earth for a long time. || 185 ||
They both, brothers, enjoyed their undivided wealth, were filled with mutual love, and seemed like two eyes, separated but looking at the same beautiful object. || 186 ||
The satisfaction they derived from their kingdom could not even match a fraction of the satisfaction they derived from their mutual love, which had originated from three births. In other words, their mutual love was far greater than their love for the kingdom. || 187 ||
Pundarika, having enjoyed pleasures for a long time and being deeply attached to them, bound himself to the terrible lifespan of hell. He was a collector of many beginnings and possessions. In the end, due to his fierce meditation, his false sense of self arose, and he died and entered the sixth hell, called Tamah-prabha, due to his sinful deeds. || 188-189 ||

Page #260:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 232

**The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

Due to the separation from his beloved, Nandiṣeṇa experienced great dispassion. Inspired by this, he went to the Muni Raja named Śivaghosa and embraced restraint. || 19 ||  He purified himself through both external and internal austerities, becoming free from all duality. He eradicated the root and subsequent karmas, attaining liberation. || 19 ||

In their third birth, both were princes. They then became gods in the first heaven. Subsequently, one became Nandiṣeṇa Balabhadra and the other became Puṇḍarīka, the enemy of Niśumbha, the counter-Narayana. This was the sixth Narayana among the three-part kings, the Narayanas. || 192 ||

Thus ends the sixty-fifth chapter of the Triṣaṣṭi Lakṣaṇa Mahāpurāṇa Sangraha, composed by Bhagavad Guṇabhadra Ācārya, which narrates the Purāṇa of Arnatha Tīrthankara Cakravartī, Subhauma Cakravartī, Nandiṣeṇa Balabhadra, Puṇḍarīka Nārāyaṇa, and Niśumbha Pratinārāyaṇa. || 15 ||

**Note:** The term "Pratinārāyaṇa" is a Jain term referring to a powerful being who opposes the teachings of the Tirthankaras.

Page #261:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Sixth Chapter

He who conquers the enemy of delusion, the evil one, like a wrestler, is the true victor. May Mallinath, the conqueror, be our remover of suffering. ||1||

In the Jambudvipa, in the land of Kachakaavati, east of Mount Meru, there was a city called Vitashoka, ruled by the noble king Vaishravana. ||2||

Just as clay remains under the control of the potter, so too, the king's subjects remained under his control, adorned as he was with great virtues. ||3||

The greatest benefit for his subjects was that the king used his treasury, fortresses, and army for their welfare. ||4||

In times of great danger, he protected his subjects by accumulating wealth and guided them on the right path through righteous governance. ||5||

Thus, he enjoyed the prosperity gained through the influence of his growing merit, like a newly married woman, for a long time. ||6||

One day, the king, with his noble mind, went out of the city to see the growing forest at the beginning of the rainy season. ||7||

There, like a great king spreading his branches and sub-branches, encompassing the earth, and served by many Brahmins, stood a banyan tree, spreading its branches and sub-branches, encompassing the earth, and served by many birds and Brahmins. ||8||

Seeing the banyan tree, the king said to his companions, "Look, look at its vastness! It seems to be imitating us, bearing such height and strong roots." ||9||

Thus, showing his companions the wonder, the king went to another forest and returned by the same path. ||10||

Returning, he saw that the banyan tree had been reduced to ashes from the root due to a lightning strike. Seeing this, he began to ponder, "Whose roots are strong in this world? Whose expanse is vast? Whose height is great? If this banyan tree, with its strong roots, vast expanse, and great height, has met such a fate, what can be said of others?" ||11||

Thinking thus, he was terrified by the state of the world. He gave his kingdom to his son and went to Mount Srinaga. ||12||

Page #262:
---------------------------
234
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the king gave his kingdom to his son, Sri Naganagavati. Sri Nagapati, along with him, drank the Dharma-rasa-ayana. ||13|| He attained great tapasya along with many kings. He studied the eleven angas according to the rules and with wisdom. ||14|| He earned the name of Tirthankara and the gotra of Upatta-bhavana. He practiced tapasya for a long time and renounced all possessions. ||15|| He was born in the Aparajita, one of the Anuttara Vimana. He had the stature of thirty-three oceans and his body was one hand high. ||16|| He breathed once after sixteen months and a half. He took mental food once after thirty-three thousand years. ||17|| His enjoyment was free from any doubt. His knowledge extended to the Lokanali. ||18|| His power, strength, and the power of his actions extended as far as his knowledge. ||19|| When his lifespan was reduced to six months, he was about to descend to earth. At that time, in the Vanga region of the Bharat Kshetra, there was a king named Kumbha, a descendant of Ikshvaku, belonging to the Kashyapa gotra. ||20|| He had a queen named Prajavati, who was like another Lakshmi. The gods had bestowed upon her unimaginable wealth and splendor. ||21|| On the first day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, in the Ashwini Nakshatra, she saw sixteen dreams that indicated auspicious events. ||22|| At that time, the auspicious readers chanted auspicious mantras in a loud voice. The morning drum, which disturbed the sleep of the people, was beaten. ||23|| Prajavati woke up with great joy, bathed, and adorned herself in auspicious attire. Like the moon's ray reaching the moon, she went to her husband. ||24|| She was blooming like a lotus in the assembly. The king, seeing her, was delighted and offered her a seat and other things. ||25|| She sat on the half-lotus posture and narrated all the dreams to her husband. She wanted to know the auspicious results of those dreams. ||26|| The king, in order, told her the results of each dream separately. He said, "Because you saw an elephant entering your mouth, Ahmimdra will be born in your womb." ||27|| The gods, following his words, said, "It is true." ||28||

Page #263:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Sixth Chapter

235

Having assembled, they celebrated the descent from heaven festival. The parents of the blessed one, filled with joy, returned to their abode. || 29 ||

The womb of the mother, bearing the Jina child, shone brightly, like the surface of a mirror reflecting the full moon. || 30 ||

In the ninth month, on the full moon day, the queen Prajavati gave birth to the god, radiant like the full moon, with all his limbs perfectly formed, endowed with all auspicious marks, and possessing three eyes of knowledge. || 31-32 ||

At that time, all the gods, filled with joy, arrived and, taking the child, who was like a ball of fire, went to Mount Meru. There, they installed the Jina child, bathed him with the milk of the ocean, adorned him with fine ornaments, and proclaimed him as Mallinath, praising him loudly. || 33-34 ||

They then brought him back and, placing him in the lap of his mother, announced, "His name is Mallinath." They then returned to their respective abodes. || 35 ||

After the end of the period of the Arnath Tirthankara, a thousand crore years passed, and the blessed Mallinath was born. His lifespan was included in this period. || 36 ||

His lifespan was fifty-five thousand years, his body was twenty-five bows tall, and his complexion was like gold. || 37 ||

When a hundred years of his childhood had passed, one day, Lord Mallinath saw that the entire city was decorated for his marriage. Everywhere, fluttering white flags were hoisted, arches were erected, colorful garlands were strung, and clusters of flowers were scattered. The sound of drums and other instruments, overpowering even the roar of the ocean, filled the air. Seeing the city thus decorated, he remembered his beautiful, invincible chariot from his previous birth. He thought, "Where is the love born of detachment and the glory that arises from it, and where is this marriage that brings shame to the virtuous? This is a paradox." || 38-41 ||

Page #264:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
8
All this is ridiculed by the common people.  Condemning it, the wise one became eager to leave the world. || 42 || Then the sages, having received the detailed praise, approved of his intention and disappeared into the sky. || 43 || Even among the Tirthankaras, some have this kind of mind.  Renouncing worldly attachments is difficult, even for the great, in their youth. || 44 || Thus, with devotion, they conversed in the sky, celebrating the great auspiciousness of his departure from the world. || 45 || The gods, full of joy, brought the Kumar to the garden of the White Forest.  The Kumar, seated on a chariot called Jayanta, || 46 || went to the White Forest garden, observing a two-day fast, relying on the month, constellation, day, and fortnight of his birth. || 47 || Having paid homage to the Siddhas, he renounced both external and internal attachments.  In the evening, he attained Samayam with three hundred kings. || 48 ||  He became radiant with the fourth knowledge, born from the conviction of Samayam.  Thinking, "This is the path," he was inspired by right knowledge. || 49 || He entered Mithila, where the king, Nandishena, welcomed him.  He offered him food and received auspicious omens. || 50 || "For six days, he remained in the forest, in the previous state of concealment.  He renounced going and coming for two days, below the Ashoka tree. || 51 || Just as at birth, on these auspicious days, he attained Kevala Jnana, due to the destruction of the three obscuring karmas. || 52 || As if awakened by that knowledge, all the Indras, knowing all the Vedas, came together and worshipped him. || 53 || There were twenty-eight Ganadhipas, starting with Visakha, five hundred and fifty Purvadharis, twenty-nine thousand teachers, two thousand two hundred venerable Avadhijnani, the same number of Kevalajnani, one thousand four hundred Vadi, two thousand nine hundred adorned with Vikriya Riddhi, and one thousand seven hundred... || 54-56 ||

Page #265:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Sixth Chapter

**57.**  The Muni-Indra, with a single-minded focus on the knowledge of the five Paryayas, had forty thousand Muni-Rajas with him. 

**58.**  There were fifty thousand Aryikas, starting with Bandhushena, and one lakh Shravakas and three times that number of Shravikas. 

**59.**  The Devas and Devis were countless, and the Tiryanchas were innumerable, including lions. Thus, the twelve assemblies always adorned Mallinath Bhagwan.

**60.**  With his divine voice, renowned far and wide, Mallinath Bhagwan guided the Bhavyas, the travelers on the path of liberation, and, at their request, wandered through many great countries.

**61.**  When a month remained of his lifespan, he reached Sammed Shikhar. There, with five thousand Munis, he took the Pratima Yoga.

**62.**  On the seventh day of the bright fortnight of Falgun, in the Bharani Nakshatra, at dusk, he attained the Tanuvat, the state of liberation from the cycle of birth and death.

**63.**  At that time, Indra and other Devas descended from heaven to celebrate the Nirvana Kalyanak, and purified the area with offerings of incense and other things.

**64.**  From the ocean of Samsara, filled with waves of birth and death, salty with the water of sorrow, and with whirlpools of desire, Mallinath Bhagwan, who had accumulated the jewels of virtues, crossed over, leaving behind the crocodile of the body, in the boat of meditation, and reached the shore of liberation.

**65.**  May Mallinath Bhagwan, who showed the supreme path of liberation, who is worshipped by all beings, and who is full of all virtues, grant you all the fortune of liberation.

**66.**  He who was once King Vaishravana, then became Ahmindra in the incomparable aircraft called Aparajita, and then became...

Page #266:
---------------------------
238
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, may the Tirthankara Mallinatha, the great enemy of all delusion, bestow upon you all unparalleled happiness. || 66 || 

In the lineage of Mallinatha, there was a Chakravarti named Padma. In his third birth, he was a king named Shri Puresh in the Sukachchha region, east of Mount Meru, in this Jambudvipa. He was the best embodiment of all the qualities attributed to kings by the scriptures. || 67-68 ||

In his kingdom, there were no obstacles for his subjects, such as injustice and the other five types of suffering. Therefore, all his subjects were flourishing in happiness. || 69 ||

He had conquered all his enemies with the power of the three types of wealth (Shakti). He had ceased all warfare and enjoyed all pleasures through Dharma and Artha. || 70 ||

Once, upon seeing a meteor shower, he attained self-knowledge. He began to see his desired possessions as fleeting and transient. || 71 ||

He thought to himself, "I have been foolishly enjoying these pleasures, thinking they were permanent. If this meteor shower had not happened, I would have continued to wander in the ocean of Samsara." || 72 ||

Thinking thus, he entrusted his kingdom to his son and went to the presence of Shivagupta Jinendra, seeking liberation. He embraced both types of restraint, namely, determination (nishchaya) and conduct (vyavahar). || 73 ||

His austerities were radiant with the eight types of purity. He had stopped the flow of negative karma and, gradually reaching the end of his lifespan, he had attained equanimity in his mind. || 74 ||

He was very satisfied with the imperishable heaven he had acquired through his kingdom and his own efforts. Just as a person is satisfied when he buys a valuable item for a small price. || 75 ||

He had a lifespan of twenty-two Sagaras. At the end of his lifespan as the lord of the Achyuta heaven, he was born again. 

In the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa, there is a country called Kashi. In its city of Varanasi, there reigned a king named Padma, a descendant of Ikshvaku. His wife gave birth to a son named Padma, who possessed all the auspicious qualities, starting with the Padma Lakshana. He had a lifespan of thirty thousand years, stood twenty dhanus tall, and was radiant like gold. Even the gods prayed for his radiance and other qualities. || 76-78 ||

Page #267:
---------------------------
The Sixty-sixth Chapter

79. Having obtained the position of Chakravarti by his own efforts, he enjoyed the tenfold pleasures for a long time without attachment. 

80. He had eight daughters, starting with Prithvisundari, all of whom were virtuous. He happily gave them in marriage to the sons of the Vidhyadhara king, Suketu.

81. Thus, the time of Chakravarti Padmaka was passing pleasantly. One day, a beautiful cloud appeared in the sky, bringing joy to the Chakravarti, but it soon vanished.

82. Seeing this, the Chakravarti pondered, "Even though this cloud had no enemies, it still perished. How then can a wise person have faith in the stability of possessions, which have many enemies?"

83. As the Chakravarti was contemplating this and becoming inclined towards restraint, his aged and wicked minister, Suketu, spoke to him.

84. "This is the time for you to enjoy your kingdom. You are still young, in the prime of your youth. Enjoy the pleasures of the world. This is not the time for austerity. Why are you wasting your time in such thoughts?"

85. "What can be achieved by any kind of austerity? It is just a waste of effort. There is no fruit in it, nor is there any such thing as an afterlife."

86. "If you want to know why there is no afterlife, listen. How can there be an afterlife when there is no such thing as a soul that resides in it? Just as a fermented mixture of flour and yeast produces intoxicating power, so too does the body, composed of the five elements, produce consciousness. To say that there is a soul is like saying that there are flowers in the sky. Since there is no soul, the desire to experience the fruits of one's actions after death is like a barren woman wanting to wear a garland of sky-flowers."

87. "Therefore, abandon this desire for austerity and rule your kingdom without worry."

88. "Besides, even if we were to accept the existence of a soul, how can you, in your tender youth, endure such harsh austerities, which even a mature person would find difficult?"

89. Hearing the words of his minister, who was a nihilist, the Chakravarti replied, "The group of elements that we see in this world, consisting of form, touch, taste, smell, and color, is material in nature. The consciousness that experiences pleasure, pain, etc., is different from this group of elements. This soul, endowed with consciousness, exists in our body, separate from the body itself. This is experienced through self-awareness."

Page #268:
---------------------------
240
It is inferred from the evidence of purposeful actions that there is a soul in the bodies of other men as well. Therefore, it must be accepted that there is a separate entity called the soul, and also the existence of the afterlife, because the memory of past births is seen. || 12 || Just as the intoxication that arises in the mind from drinking alcohol comes from the previous consciousness, similarly, the cause and effect-based intellect that arises in all living beings in the world comes from the previous consciousness. Therefore, although the birth and death of living beings are seen as having a beginning and an end, their existence is eternal in terms of the common consciousness. || 13 || By such arguments, the Chakravarti convinced the nihilistic minister of the existence of the soul, dismissed his family, entrusted the kingdom to his son, and went to the Jinaraja named Samadhigupta, where he took vows of restraint along with kings like Suketu. || 63-65 || They attained the culmination of the progressive purifications, and thus destroyed their karmas. || 66 || Now, they were radiant with the nine perfections and became masters of the pure divine sounds. When the final time came, they abandoned their three bodies - the noble, the radiant, and the karmic - and resided in the realm of the Supreme Lord, the realm of the perfected. || 67 || The Chakravarti, who was delighted by many crowned kings and had attained an excellent position and extraordinary wealth, did not experience any decline in his body due to the auspicious rise of Padma. || 68 || Padma Chakravarti, who had enjoyed many pleasures, did not only attain Lakshmi, but also many other advancements along with fame. Thus, Padma Chakravarti, with Lakshmi, became a source of gathering for the virtuous. || 69 || "He was as lofty as Mount Mandara, with a noble heart. He was free from attachment, like Mount Sumeru. He was the ninth, the unparalleled, shining with the splendor of kings." || 70 ||

Page #269:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Sixth Chapter

**241** The first king to be born was Prajapala, who became the lord of the realm by conquering and controlling. He was the master of the entire Bharat region, a home of virtue, a lotus of merit. He attained the supreme abode, a pure and peaceful state. **101**

In this very Tirtha, the seventh were Balabhadra and Narayana. In their third existence, they were princes in Saketa. **102**

Because they were not dear to their father, he abandoned them and, out of affection, gave the position of Yuvaraja to his younger brother. Although he had not decided to give the Yuvaraja position to his younger brother, the king still gave it to him. **103**

Both brothers thought that the minister had done all this, so they were very angry and harbored resentment towards him. They became followers of the Dharma Tirtha. **104**

They accepted the discipleship of the Muni Raja Shiv Gupta and embraced restraint. As a result, at the end of their lives, they died and attained the divine position in the celestial chariot named "Suvishala" in the Saudharma heaven. **105**

From there, they were born as the beloved sons of King Agnishikha, the crown jewel of the Ikshvaku dynasty, in Varanasi. **106**

Their mothers were Aparajita and Keshavati, respectively. Nandimitra was the elder brother, and Datta was the younger. **107**

Their lifespan was thirty-two thousand years. Their bodies were twenty-two dhanus tall, and their complexion was like the moon and the Indranila gem. Both were supreme. **108**

Then, the minister, whose story has been told before, wandered in the ocean of Samsara and became the king of the Vidyadharas, named Balindra, the ruler of the city of Mandara, situated on Mount Vijaya. **109**

One day, Balindra, who was known for his strength and arrogance, sent a message to you, saying, "The famous and large Gandhagaja named Bhadrakshira, which you possess, is worthy of us. Therefore, it should be given to us." **110-111**

Hearing the messenger's words, the two brothers replied, "If your master Balindra is worthy, then the elephant will be given. If he is not worthy, then it will not be given." **112**

The Mandaragaja was a bearer of the Dharma, a king with superior qualities, and the ninth Chakravarti among Chakravartis. The lotus was adorned with great joy. **113**

The king named Prajapala, who was born first, then became the Indra of the Achyuta heaven by controlling his senses. After that, the Chakravarti named Padma, who was the master of the entire Bharat region and a home of many virtues, attained the supreme abode. May this Chakravarti Padma grant us all pure and peaceful happiness. **101**

After that, in the Tirtha of Mallinath Tirthankara, Balabhadra and Narayana were the seventh. They were princes of Ayodhya in their third existence. **102**

They were not dear to their father, so he abandoned them and, out of affection, gave the position of Yuvaraja to his younger brother. Although he had not decided to give the Yuvaraja position to his younger brother, the king still gave it to him. **103**

Both brothers thought that the minister had done all this, so they were very angry and harbored resentment towards him. They became followers of the Dharma Tirtha. **104**

They accepted the discipleship of the Muni Raja Shiv Gupta and embraced restraint. As a result, at the end of their lives, they died and attained the divine position in the celestial chariot named "Suvishala" in the Saudharma heaven. **105**

From there, they were born as the beloved sons of King Agnishikha, the crown jewel of the Ikshvaku dynasty, in Varanasi. **106**

Their mothers were Aparajita and Keshavati, respectively. Nandimitra was the elder brother, and Datta was the younger. **107**

Their lifespan was thirty-two thousand years. Their bodies were twenty-two dhanus tall, and their complexion was like the moon and the Indranila gem. Both were supreme. **108**

Then, the minister, whose story has been told before, wandered in the ocean of Samsara and became the king of the Vidyadharas, named Balindra, the ruler of the city of Mandara, situated on Mount Vijaya. **109**

One day, Balindra, who was known for his strength and arrogance, sent a message to you, saying, "The famous and large Gandhagaja named Bhadrakshira, which you possess, is worthy of us. Therefore, it should be given to us." **110-111**

Hearing the messenger's words, the two brothers replied, "If your master Balindra is worthy, then the elephant will be given. If he is not worthy, then it will not be given." **112**

Page #270:
---------------------------
## 242

It is said that the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana was spoken by Karna, which was harsh to the ears. Hearing this, Balindra, imitating Yama, got ready to fight.  Along with the two warriors, Bhimakopa was also armed.  Keshavati's elder brother, the lord of the Surakantara city in the southern region, Kesari Vikram, a Vidyadhara king, gave the two Kumaras the two Mahavidyas, Simhapakshindravahini and Garuda Vahini, on the Sammed Shikhar, as per the rituals.  He accepted to help them in their work, considering them as his own.  

Then, a fierce battle took place between the two powerful armies, which was like the end of time, destroying all beings.  In that battle, full of illusions, Balindra's son, Shatabali, was taken to the mouth of Yama by Balabhadra in anger.  Seeing this, Balindra was filled with rage.  He aimed his discus at Narayana Datta, who was like Indra, but the discus circled around and hit his right arm.  Datta Narayana took the same discus and killed him, taking his head in his hand.  

At the end, the two heroes, having declared victory, took control of the three-part earth-chakra along with the chakra.  After enjoying the pleasures of the kingdom for a long time, Chakravarti Narayana Datta, bound by the terrible lifespan of hell, went to the seventh hell.  

Due to the separation from his brother, Balabhadra became very detached.  Therefore, he took initiation from the Sambhuta Jinendra along with many others and finally became a Kevali, attaining liberation.  

Those who were once famous princes in Ayodhya, after taking initiation, became gods in the Saudharma heaven at the end of their lifespan.  After being expelled from there, they became Nandimitra and Datta, the crown jewels of the Ikshvaku dynasty in the city of Varanasi.  Of these, Datta went to the seventh earth after death, and Nandimitra...

Page #271:
---------------------------
Sixty-sixth Parva
243. The minister, after wandering for a long time in the ocean of births, became a celestial being named Balindra.  He was killed by Datta Narayana and went to an unbearable hell.  Therefore, virtuous people should abandon the practice of hatred. || 125 ||

Thus ends the narration of the Puranas of Mallinatha Tirthankara, Padmachakravarti, Nandimitra, Baldeva, Datta Narayana, and Balindra, the counter-Narayana, in the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha, composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya. || 66 ||

He attained Kaivalya-Lakshmi. || 124 || The minister's soul wandered in the ocean of existence for a long time and then became a Vidyaadhara named Bindra.  He was killed by Datta Narayana and went to a terrible hell.  Therefore, virtuous people should abandon the practice of hatred. || 125 ||

Thus ends the sixty-sixth Parva of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha, composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya, known as the Arsha.

Page #272:
---------------------------
The 76th chapter is about the meaning of the word "Prat" which signifies the renunciation of all things.  May the great Muni Suvrata, who was the embodiment of this vow, bestow his blessings upon us. ||1||

In his third birth, Muni Suvrata was born as King Harivarma in the city of Champapur, in the Anga region of Bharat Kshetra. ||2||

One day, a Nirgrantha Muni named Anantavirya arrived in the king's garden.  King Harivarma, desiring to pay his respects, went to the Muni with his entire family, carrying offerings. ||3||

He circumambulated the Muni three times, offered him worship three times, and prostrated himself three times.  Then he inquired about the nature of eternal Dharma. ||4||

The Muni replied that a living being is of two types: a samsari (bound) and a mukta (liberated).  The samsari is bound by eight karmas, while the mukta is free from them. ||5||

These eight karmas have eight root divisions, such as Jnanavarana, etc., and one hundred and forty-eight sub-divisions. ||6||

There are four types of bondage, based on the nature of the karma, and four types of karma-bondage, based on the four types of wrong belief, non-renunciation, passions, and yoga, as explained by the Jinas. ||7||

There are four stages of karma: udhaya (arising), upshama (subduing), kshaya (destruction), and kshayopa-shama (destruction and subduing).  Samsara is of five types, based on the five categories of dravya (substance), kshetra (field), kala (time), bhava (existence), and bhava (state). ||8||

These karmas are controlled by gupti (guarding), etc., and by tapas (austerity), both control and destruction are achieved.  Through the fourth type of shukla dhyana (meditation), liberation is attained, and the being becomes a Siddha. ||9||

The destruction of all karmas is called moksha (liberation), and the destruction of a part of them is called nirjara (destruction).  The happiness of a liberated being is immeasurable, free from all obstacles, and eternal. ||10||

Thus, the great Muni Anantavirya, who awakened the lotus-like souls with the rays of his words, taught the truth to King Harivarma. ||11||

Understanding the truth as explained by the Muni, King Harivarma renounced the world.  He entrusted his kingdom to his eldest son and renounced all possessions, both external and internal.  He then quickly... ||12||

... renounced the two types of attachment, with great speed and agility.  He practiced self-control, surrounded by many monks who had renounced the world and were adorned with the sacred thread. ||13||

He learned the eleven angas (parts) of the Jain scriptures from a guru, and he cultivated faith, purity, and other virtues, becoming a Tirthankara (founder of a new era). ||14||

Page #273:
---------------------------
The **Sapta-Rishi** (Seven Sages) had performed austerities for a long time. At the end of his life, he attained **Samadhi-Maraṇa** (death in meditation), becoming the **Prāṇa-Tej** (Lord of Life), the **Vibhu** (All-pervading), who would later become the **Pañca-Kalyāṇa** (Five Auspicious Events).  || 15 ||

His lifespan was equivalent to twenty oceans, he had **Śukla-Leśyā** (white aura), his body was three and a half cubits tall, he breathed once every ten months, took food once every twenty thousand years, had minimal mental activity, and was endowed with eight **Riddhis** (supernatural powers). || 16-17 ||

His **Ava-dhi-jñāna** (knowledge of the limits of space) extended to the fifth earth, and his radiance and power extended as far. He enjoyed happiness there for a long time. When six months of his lifespan remained, and he was about to descend to earth, the gods showered his birthplace with jewels. || 18-19 ||

In the **Bharata-Kṣetra** (land of India), in the **Magadha** country, there was a city called **Rājagṛha**. There, **Su-mitra**, the **Hari-vaṁśa** (descendant of Hari) jewel, ruled as king. || 20 ||

He belonged to the **Kāśyapa** gotra (lineage), and his queen was named **Somā**. The gods worshipped her. On the second day of the dark fortnight of **Śrāvaṇa** (August-September), in the **Śravaṇa** constellation, when the aforementioned **Prāṇa-Tej** was about to descend from heaven, Queen Somā saw sixteen dreams that indicated auspicious events. After that, she saw a powerful elephant entering her mouth. Filled with joy, she woke up, donned pure garments, and went to the king.  || 21-23 ||

With a desire to hear the meaning of the dreams, she told the king about them. The king, knowing the limits of time, said that the **Tri-jagat-pate** (Lord of the Three Worlds), the **Jina-endra** (Victorious Lord), would be born to her. || 24 ||

Hearing the king's words, the queen's heart and face blossomed. At that moment, the gods came and performed her **Abhiṣeka-utsava** (coronation ceremony).  || 25 ||

She enjoyed her time with heavenly pleasures provided by the gods. In the ninth month, she gave birth to a noble child. || 26 ||

This birth occurred after **Dhauvana** (a period of time) of one lakh years after the **Śrī-Mallinātha** Tīrthaṁkara (ford-maker). This lifespan was included in that period. || 27 ||

At the time of the birth, the **Indra** (king of the gods), who had come and whose radiance filled all directions, went to **Meru** mountain to meet **Muni-Su-vrata** (the sage of good vows). || 28 ||

Page #274:
---------------------------
## The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

**Chapter 28-42**

**28.**  The Muni Suvrata Nath was born and given this name.

**29.**  His lifespan was thirty thousand years, his height twenty dhanus, his complexion blue like the neck of a peacock, and he was endowed with all auspicious marks.

**30.**  After seven thousand five hundred years of his Kumar period, he attained the throne and experienced a continuous stream of joy.

**31.**  When fifteen thousand years had passed, one day during a time of thunderous clouds, his sacrificial elephant remembered the forest and stopped eating. King Muni Suvrata Nath, with his all-knowing vision, understood the elephant's mind.

**32-33.**  With curiosity, he spoke to the people, in a beautiful voice, about the elephant's past life.

**34-35.**  In a previous life, this elephant was a king named Narapati, ruler of Talpur. He was always distracted by pride in his lineage and other vices. He was ignorant of the difference between worthy and unworthy recipients, and was always deluded by false knowledge. He gave gifts to those who desired them, and as a result, he became an elephant.

**36.**  This elephant does not remember his past ignorance, nor does he think of his former kingdom and its wealth. He does not consider the futility of giving gifts to the unworthy.

**37.**  Hearing the words of the Lord, the noble elephant remembered his past life and immediately took up the practice of restraint and non-restraint.

**38.**  As a result, the Lord Mallinath attained enlightenment and was ready to renounce all possessions. At that time, the worldly gods came and praised him, supporting his resolve.

**39.**  He gave his kingdom to his son, Vijay, and received the initiation ceremony for liberation, a great blessing bestowed by the gods.

**40.**  He rode in a magnificent palanquin called Aparajit, his fame spreading far and wide, his ignorance fading, and he was carried by the celestial beings, the humans, and the gods.

**41.**  He went to the forest called Nila and observed the fast of the sixth day of the lunar fortnight. On the tenth day of the dark fortnight of Vaisakha, in the Shravana constellation, in the evening, he took the vow of restraint along with a thousand kings.

**42.**  The king of the gods, Saudharma Indra, who desires liberation, saw the Lord Mallinath, the all-seeing, and offered him a garland of flowers.

Page #275:
---------------------------
The 76th chapter: Seeking the eternal abode, he attained the fifth ocean. The fourth stage of knowledge purified his mind; that was enough for him.  ||43||  Satisfied with equanimity, he remained content even in his emaciated body.  One day, at the time of parana, he went to the city of Rajagriha. ||44||  King Vrishabhasena, whose complexion was like gold, offered him delicious food and received the fifth wonder. ||45||  After eleven months of living in seclusion, he went to the forest where he had taken his vows.  There, he stayed under a Champaka tree and observed a two-day fast.  On the ninth day of the dark fortnight of Vaisakha, with the Shravana constellation, in the evening, he attained Kevala Jnana through perfect meditation. ||46-47||  At that very moment, Indra arrived and celebrated the auspicious occasion with great joy.  He created a Samavasarana adorned with a Manastambha and various other riches. ||48||  There were eighteen Ganadharas, starting with Malli, five hundred holders of the twelve limbs of knowledge, twenty-one thousand teachers worthy of being honored by the virtuous, one thousand eight hundred Avadhijnani, the same number of Kevala Jnani, two thousand two hundred holders of the Vikriya Riddhi, one thousand five hundred Manahparyaya Jnani, and one thousand two hundred Vadi.  Thus, there were thirty thousand Muni Rajas with him. ||49-52||  There were fifty thousand Aryikas, starting with Pushpadanta, one hundred thousand Shravakas, and three hundred thousand Shravikas.  There were countless Tiryanchas and innumerable gods and goddesses.  Thus, there were twelve assemblies.  Preaching the Dharma to all of them, he wandered in the Aryakshetra for a long time.  When only one month of his life remained, he went to Sammed Shikhar and, along with a thousand Munis, took the Pratimāyoga.  On the twelfth day of the dark fortnight of Phalguna, in the latter part of the night, he shed his body and attained liberation. ||53-56||  At that time, the assembly of the best gods arrived and performed the Pancham Kalyanak, offered their respects with great splendor, and then all the gods departed to their respective places. ||57||

Page #276:
---------------------------
## 248
**The Uttarapurana of the Mahapuraana**

Your words, which dispel the darkness of the world, are like the sun, and your knowledge destroys the ignorance born from all things in the world. I bow to you, O Bhagavan Munisuvrata, who is worshipped by Indra and all the world. ||50||

Some say that cause is distinct from effect, quality from the qualified, and the general from the particular, while others say that they are not distinct. Both these views are based on one-sidedness and therefore do not hold true. But through the combination of your Nayas, both views are perfectly reconciled. Therefore, O Bhagavan, the virtuous call you "Aapta" (one who has attained liberation), and we all bow to you. ||59||

He who was formerly King Harivarma, having performed austerities and cultivated the sixteen types of Bhavana, bound the karma of a Tirthankara. After that, he left his body through Samadhi-marana and became a Pranatendra. From there, he came to this world and became a Tirthankara, a pure moon in the sky of the Hari-kula. He blossomed the Kumudinis, the auspicious beings, and bestowed his Lakshmi upon all. ||60||

In the same Tirtha of Munisuvrata, there was a Chakravarti named Harishena. In his previous birth, he was a great king in the Tirtha of Anantanatha. Due to some reason, he performed intense austerities and became a great Deva in the vast Vimana of the Sanatkumara heaven, with an lifespan of six Sagaras. After enjoying the pleasures there, he was reborn in the Tirtha of Munisuvrata, becoming the ruler of the city of Bhogapura. ||61-62||

He was the son of Queen Aira, the wife of King Padma-nabha, of the Ikshvaku dynasty. ||64||

His lifespan was ten thousand years, his complexion was like molten gold, his body was twenty Dhanus tall, and he gradually attained full youth. ||65||

One day, King Padma-nabha, along with Harishena, went to the beautiful garden called Manohara. There, they saw the Tirthankara Anantavirya. ||66||

After bowing to him and hearing about the truth of Samsara and Moksha, Harishena, desiring to attain peace, renounced his worldly life. ||67||

**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms like "Tirthankara", "Bhagavan", "Aapta", "Naya", "Bhavana", "Samadhi-marana", "Pranatendra", "Chakravarti", "Dhanus", etc.

Page #277:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

The king, desiring the supreme state, entrusted the burden of the kingdom to his son and, along with many others, attained restraint. || 68 ||

Harishena, considering it the second step to liberation, also adopted the excellent vow of a Shravaka and entered the city. || 69 ||

While performing severe austerities for a long time, Padma-nabha, the great Muni, attained Kaivalya in the Dikshavana, adorned with the image-yoga. || 70 ||

On that day, in the armory of King Harishena, appeared the four jewels: the Chakra, Chatra, Khadga, and Danda. And in the Sri-griha, appeared the three jewels: Kakini, Charma, and Mani. || 71 ||

Hearing both these news simultaneously, he was very pleased. He gave a great reward to the messengers and, with the desire to perform the Jina-puja, departed. || 72 ||

After worshipping the Jina with reverence, he returned and entered the city. He had just begun the puja of the Chakra-ratna when, in that city, appeared the four: the Purohita, Grihapati, Sthapati, and the commander of the army. || 73-74 ||

The celestial beings, bound by the name of the Gan, brought from the Vijayardha mountain, elephants, horses, and the jewel of a maiden. || 75 ||

They themselves, with devotion, brought nine great treasures that had arisen at the mouths of rivers. || 76 ||

With this praiseworthy six-fold army, he set out in all directions, conquering the essence of the directions, accepting them, and becoming victorious over all. || 77 ||

Served by the celestial kings, human kings, and the lords of the birds, he resided in his royal capital, enjoying the tenfold pleasures without any hindrance for a long time. || 78 ||

Once, during the eight days of the Nandi-shvara festival in the month of Kartik, he performed the Maha-puja and, on the last day, observed a fast. || 79 ||

He was seated on the roof of the palace, in the midst of the assembly, shining like the autumn moon in the sky. While sitting there, he saw the moon being eclipsed by Rahu. || 80 ||

Seeing this, he thought: "Alas, the state of this world! Look, this moon, the chief leader of the luminous world, is full and surrounded by his family, yet Rahu has eclipsed him. If this is the state of him, who cannot be transgressed, what must be the state of others when such a time comes?" || 81 ||

Page #278:
---------------------------
250
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, here in the beginning of time, what is the speed of others? The king of Bharata is free from sorrow, as if he is playing in destiny. || 82 || Describing the nature of the Anupreksha, he explained the essence of Dharma to those present in his assembly, and quickly made them knowers of the truth. || 83 || Giving the kingdom to his son, the great army, Maha Sena, he satisfied the poor, the helpless, and the beggars, as requested by him. || 84 || Reaching the great sage, Sri Naga, who resided on the Simanta mountain, he renounced all attachments according to the prescribed method, and conquered the desire for love. || 85 || "Having attained restraint and the means of peace with many, he gradually attained the fourfold [types of] wealth, life, and the end." || 86 || Worshipping the [fourfold] worship, he took refuge in the Prayopagama. His sins were destroyed, he was the embodiment of mercy, and he was born in the ultimate, unsurpassed, Vimāna - Sarvarthasiddhi. || 87 || Once upon a time, there was a king who was adorned with prosperity, but due to the taint of sin, he became very fearful. Fearing, he took refuge in the austerity of the world, and became a god in the third heaven. At the end of the kalpa, he came to earth, attained the position of a chakravarti, enjoyed [the world], and then, as the glorious Harishena, the bull of kings, he attained Sarvarthasiddhi. || 88 || In this very Tirtha, the eighth Balabhadra and Narayana, named Rama and Lakshmana, were born. The Purana of them is narrated here. || 89 || In this very Bharat Kshetra, in the country called Malaya, there was a city called Ratnapur. In it, the great king, Prajapati, ruled. || 90 || He had a son named Chandrachula, born to his wife, Gunakanta. The son of the minister of the same Prajapati Maharaj was named Vijay. There was a great rivalry between Chandrachula and Vijay. Both these sons were very dear to their fathers, they were brought up with great affection, and the dharma of their lineage always inspired them. Therefore, they became wicked, like wild elephants. || 91-92 || One day, in the same city, Kubera Seth, the son of Vaishravana Seth, born to his wife Gotama, was giving his daughter, Kubera Datta, in marriage to a great son named Sri Datta.

Page #279:
---------------------------
251
Having heard the description of the prince's beauty and other virtues from his own attendant, the merchant's son eagerly endeavors to win over the maiden for himself along with his friend. (15) The king, hearing the clamor of the merchant's guild, is inflamed with anger at his son's misconduct, like a fire kindled by the fuel of his son's evil deeds. (16) Summoning the city guard, the king orders him to immediately make the wicked prince a guest in the other world (i.e., kill him). (17) Thereupon, the guard, impelled by the king's command, seizes the life-grasping (i.e., living) prince and brings him near the lord (i.e., the king). (18) Seeing this, the king ponders how this sinner should be quickly disposed of, and orders that he be impaled on a sharp stake and placed in the cremation ground. (19) The city guard, obeying the king's order, proceeds to kill the prince, for it is appropriate to follow the path of justice, not that of affection. (10) Thereupon, the chief minister, placing the citizens in front, approaches the king and, raising his lotus-like hands, makes a clear representation. (11) "This one has lacked the discrimination between right and wrong since childhood; this negligence is our own, for children are to be trained by their parents. (12) If an elephant is not properly tamed in childhood, it cannot be controlled by men later; similarly, if these children are not disciplined in their youth, what might they do when they attain power and are seized by the grip of arrogance? (13) This prince is neither wise nor foolish, nor does he deserve capital punishment. His mind is still malleable, so he should be properly instructed even now. (14) Your anger is not directed at him, but you wish to lead him to the path of justice; restrain him alone for the continuity of the royal lineage. (15) The scripture says, 'One thing was intended, another happened.' This calamity of the extinction of your progeny is now approaching you. (16) Hearing these words of the minister, the citizens standing before the king, overcome by unspeakable fear, said: (17) "O great king, please forgive the latter half of this one's (i.e., the prince's) offense. (18) Hearing this conciliatory speech of the minister, the king uttered a distorted remark."

Page #280:
---------------------------
252
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, those who are ignorant of the meaning of the scriptures, even though they are learned, are like those who have crossed the ocean. The opinion of kings is that the wicked should be punished and the righteous should be protected. || 109 || Those who are attached to worldly affairs, due to their love, delusion, attachment, and fear, will become the agents of that which we are fighting against. || 110 || Therefore, it is not right for you to involve me in this wrong path. Even if one's right hand is wicked, it should be cut off by the king. || 111 || A foolish king who is far removed from the understanding of what should be done and what should not be done is like a man who has renounced the world. He cannot achieve anything in this world or the next. || 112 || Therefore, I should be stopped. When the king said this, the people understood that the king knew everything and they all went home in fear. || 113 || Knowing that the king had no affection for his son, the minister said to the king, "O Lord, I will punish him myself." Thus, with the king's permission, the minister left. || 114 || He went to the mountain called Vanagiri, taking his son and the prince with him. There, he said to the prince, "O Kumar, your death is now inevitable. Are you fearless and ready to die?" The prince replied, "If I were afraid, why would I have done this? Just as cold water is pleasant to a thirsty man, so is death to me. What is there to fear?" Hearing the prince's words, the chief minister decided to do something that would benefit both worlds, the king, the prince, and himself. || 115-118 || Then, the minister went to the top of the same mountain and paid homage to the Ganadhara named Mahabala, and informed him of the reason for his coming. || 119 || The Ganadhara, who had the eyes of knowledge of the mind, said, "Do not be afraid, these two are going to be Narayana and Balabhadra in this Bharat Kshetra in their third birth." || 120 || Hearing this, the minister brought them home with great joy and made them listen to the scriptures and made them adopt restraint. || 121 || Then, the minister went to the king and said, "Like a wild elephant who has taken refuge in a cave,

Page #281:
---------------------------
The Seventieth Chapter
253
A certain forest dweller, fearless like a lion, disregarded his own pleasures, was extremely intense in his actions, and possessed a fierce determination. || 123 ||
I entrusted both those princes to him. He also said to them, "You both have committed a great sin, therefore you should not remember happiness, now you will have to suffer difficult pain." || 124 ||
One should remember the beloved deity in the heart for the sake of the afterlife. Hearing this, both of them said to me, "O Bhadra! Do not punish us both with hardship, we are doing this work ourselves, that is, we are eager to take punishment ourselves." || 125 ||
Saying this, both of them, by their own hands, obtained intense pain and became ready for the afterlife. Seeing this, I fulfilled my desired purpose and returned. O King! In this way, your intention has been fulfilled. || 126-127 ||
Hearing the minister's words, the king became overwhelmed with great sorrow and stood motionless for a while like a still tree in a windless place. || 128 ||
Thereafter, the king decided with himself, his ministers, and his relatives, and then said to the minister, "You should always do what is beneficial, what you have done today has never been done by you before." || 129 ||
The minister said, "Just as a group of rays that has passed away and a flower that has withered on a snake-infested tree, it is not appropriate to grieve over it, in the same way, this has also become past, therefore you should not grieve over it now." || 130 ||
Hearing the minister's words, the king asked, "What is the real truth?" Then the minister, who knew the king's intention, said, "Many ascetics live in the caves and dense forests of the mountains, they have conquered their enemies, the passions and objects of desire, with the stream of their sword of patience, they are constantly engaged in protecting all beings, both gross and subtle. Their fear has as if fled from fear itself, and anger does not come near them as if due to anger itself. They always disregard worldly pleasures and enjoyments like those who are unrestrained. Both those princes, having heard the good conduct of those ascetics, became detached and initiated. Hearing the minister's clear words, the king was very satisfied." || 131-135 ||
"You are the one who benefits both worlds." Thus praising the minister, the king thought, "These enjoyments are like an evil son, the cause of sin and slander." || 136 ||

Page #282:
---------------------------
254
The Great Purana, the Uttara Purana, is a great burden for the Yadava kingdom, fit for its own family. Having gone to the forest mountain, he worshipped Ganesha. Seeing the newly initiated prince and the son of the minister, he said, "I have committed a great sin, please forgive me both of you." Hearing the king's words, the newly initiated monks said, "You are the guru of both our worlds, you have bestowed this restraint upon us." Thus, having received praise from both of them, the king renounced all possessions and took restraint along with many kings. || 136-137 ||

Gradually, they destroyed the remaining destructive karmas that were the destroyers of delusion, and having attained the light of omniscience, they shone brightly in the forefront of the world. || 140 ||

Here, upholding excellent character, both the princes were outside the city of Khadgapur, taking the sun bath yoga and abandoning attachment to the body. || 141 ||

At that time, the king of Khadgapur city was named Soma Prabha. He had two wives named Sudarshana and Sita. They had two sons, Suprabha and Purushottama, who possessed excellent radiance and were superior to men in virtue. Of these, Purushottama was Narayana, who, having destroyed the anti-Narayana named Madhusudana by conquering the directions, was entering the city. Humans, Vidyadharas, and Devas were increasing his glory, and his body was full of radiance. || 141-144 ||

Seeing him entering the city, the ignorant Chandrachula Muni (the prince's jiva) became dejected. In the end, when life ended, both the monks performed four types of worship. One of them became a deva named Vijay in the Kanakaprabha chariot of the heaven of Sanatkumara, and the other became a deva named Manichula in the Maniprabha chariot. There, their excellent lifespan was like an ocean. After enjoying the pleasures there for a long time, they fell from there. || 145-147 ||

Then, in the city of Banaras in this Bharat Kshetra, King Dasharatha ruled. He had a queen named Subala. She saw a good dream, and from her womb, on the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight of the month of Phalguna, in the Magha constellation, was born a promising Balabhadra, a deva named Suvarna Chula, who was the jiva of the minister's son. His lifespan was thirteen thousand years, his name was Rama, and he had subdued all people. King Dasharatha had another queen named Kaikeyi. She saw a lake, the sun, the moon, a field of paddy, and
1 Bhubhujam Kha. 1 Chaturvidham Ka, Pa.

Page #283:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

**152.** On the Visakha Nakshatra, on the first day of the bright fortnight of Magha, a divine being named Manichula, the son of a minister, was born. He had the mark of a wheel on his body, lived for twelve thousand years, and was named Lakshmana.

**153.** Both brothers were fifteen cubits tall, possessed thirty-two auspicious marks, and were the holders of the Vanavrishabhanaraacha-samhanana. Their first Samasthan was called Samachatur-astrasam-asthan.

**154.** They were both of immeasurable power. Rama's body was as white as a swan's feather, and Lakshmana's was as blue as a blue lotus.

**155.** When Rama and Lakshmana had completed fifty-five and fifty years respectively, their time as princes, filled with the greatest prosperity, came to an end. At that time, in Ayodhya, in the land of Bharata, there was a king named Sagara.

**156.** After the first Chakravarti, Bharat Maharaj, countless kings of the Ikshvaku dynasty had ruled. After them, Harishena Maharaj, the tenth Chakravarti, had passed away and attained the state of Sarvartha-siddhi. A thousand years had passed since then.

**157.** After the passage of this time, Sagara became king. He was the ruler of an undivided kingdom and was very angry.

**158.** Once, at the Swayamvara of Sulasa, he saw a prince named Madhupingala sitting among the kings. He said, "This man is full of evil omens," and banished him from the assembly.

**159.** Madhupingala, filled with anger towards Sagara, left the Swayamvara assembly in shame. He eventually became a demon named Mahakal, after practicing self-control.

**160.** This demon was determined to destroy the lineage of Sagara.

**161.** Disguised as a Brahmin, he approached Sagara and said, "Perform the Ashta-yaga, a sacrifice prescribed in the Atharva Veda, which involves the killing of living beings. This will bring you prosperity and destroy your enemies."

**162.** Mahakal, who was not afraid of sin, deceived the foolish king with these words.

**163.** Sagara performed the sacrifice as instructed and entered the land of the sinners, the hell. His entire lineage was destroyed due to his evil deeds.

**164.** When Dasharatha heard this news, he thought, "Ayodhya has been our ancestral home for generations." He went to Ayodhya with his sons and stayed there, taking care of the city.

**165.** It was there that Bharat was born to Dasharatha's other queen. His other son, Shatrughna, was born to the same queen.

Page #284:
---------------------------
256
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana, the reason for this incident is now being narrated. The king of Mithila, Janaka, was the husband of Vasudha. ||166|| Vasudha was a beautiful queen, adorned with humility and other virtues. She gave birth to a daughter named Sita. When she reached her youth, many kings sent their messengers to ask for her hand in marriage. ||167|| But the king said, "I will give my daughter to the one whose destiny is favorable." He dismissed the messengers. ||168||
Once, the king was sitting in his court, surrounded by learned men. The commander-in-chief, Kushalamati, who was skilled in his work and well-meaning, was also present. The king asked him about an ancient story. He said, "In the past, King Sagara, Queen Sulasa, and many other beings were offered in the fire of the yagna. They all went to heaven with their bodies. This is what is heard. If heaven can still be attained by performing yagna, then we should also perform yagna according to the proper procedure." ||169-171||
Hearing the king's words, the commander-in-chief said, "The Naga princes and Asura princes are always angry and envious of each other. They obstruct each other's work. ||172-173|| This new method of yagna has been established by the Asura Mahakaala. Therefore, there is a fear that the enemies will create obstacles in it. ||174|| Moreover, the Naga king, Dharanendra, had done favors to Nami and Vinamika. Therefore, the Vidyadharas, who are partial to him, will surely try to disrupt the yagna. ||175|| Only those who are capable of removing the obstacles can succeed in the yagna. Although the Vidyadharas who live on the Vijay mountain may not know this, it is certain that Ravana, who is very powerful and controlled by the planet of pride, is already afraid that he might create obstacles in the yagna. ||176-177|| However, there is a solution. Ramachandraji is capable of everything. If we give him this daughter, he will remove all obstacles. ||178||
All the people in the court praised the commander-in-chief's words. The king, along with everyone else, decided to do this. At that time, the king sent a messenger to Rama and Lakshmana, along with a letter and gifts. ||179|| He instructed them to come quickly to protect his yagna. He also said that Sita would be given to Rama. ||180||
There were also two other sons named Shatrughna. The reason for the fame that Rama and Lakshmana would gain by killing Ravana was that at that time, King Janaka was ruling in Mithila. He had a very beautiful queen named Vasudha, who was adorned with humility and other virtues. King Janaka's queen Vasudha gave birth to a daughter named Sita. When she reached her youth, many kings sent their messengers to ask for her hand in marriage. ||165-168||
However, the king said, "I will give my daughter to the one whose destiny is favorable." He dismissed the messengers. ||168||

Page #285:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

257

He instructed the messengers to convey the message to the righteous King Dasharatha, as well as to other kings who desired the earth. 18

The king of Ayodhya, understanding the meaning of the letter and the message of the messenger, inquired of his minister to ascertain the purpose of this. 182

He narrated the message of King Janaka to his ministers and asked what should be done. In response, the minister Agamasara spoke these inauspicious words: 183

"The completion of the Yajna without any obstacles will bring benefit to both worlds, and it will be the best path for these two princes." 184

After Agamasara finished speaking, the most learned minister, Atishayamati, determined the meaning of what was said and spoke: 185

"This statement that performing the Yajna is Dharma does not reach the level of proof, therefore wise men do not engage in this act." 186

"The validity of a statement comes from the validity of the speaker. How can the statement of a contradicting person, who advocates for the Yajna, which involves the killing of all beings, be considered valid? It is like the statement of a madman. If those who interpret the Vedas are not contradicting each other, then why are there statements advocating for violence and prohibiting it in the same scripture? Perhaps you will say that the Vedas are self-created, and therefore there is no fault in contradictions. This is not true, because you can be asked: what is the nature of self-creation? Explain it. If you say that it is independent of the actions of intelligent beings, then the roaring of clouds and the croaking of frogs would also be self-created, because they too arise on their own. Therefore, the Agamas, the scriptures, are those that are spoken by the omniscient, those that benefit all beings, and those that are free from all faults. The word Yajna refers to giving great gifts and worshipping gods and sages." 187-192

"Yaga, Yajna, Krutu, Puja, Saparya, Ijya, Adhvara, Makha, and Maha are all synonyms for the act of worship." 193

"The meaning of the word Yajna, which is giving great gifts and worshipping, is itself a form of Dharma, and from Dharma, people accumulate merit..." 194

Page #286:
---------------------------
258
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is heard that Shatakratu, Shatamakha, and Shatavara appeared. They are famous in the world and in the times. || 195 || The word Yajna means violence, and its performer goes to hell. Even if he goes to heaven, those who do not perform violence will go to hell. || 196 || You might think that the body of the one who is being killed is donated, i.e., distributed to all, and by killing him, the gods are worshipped. In this way, the meaning of the word Yajna, which is to donate and worship, becomes meaningful. But your opinion is not correct because the meaning of donation and worship that you have given will be valid only in your own house, not everywhere. If the meaning of the word Yajna is violence, then why is the meaning of the root Yaj not mentioned in the Dhatu-path, where the meanings of the roots are explained? There, only 'Yaj Devapujasangatikarandaneshu', i.e., the root Yaj, means worship, unification, and donation. This is what is explained. Therefore, the meaning of the word Yajna can never be violence. You might say that if violence is not the meaning of the word Yajna, then why do Aryan men perform Yajna filled with animal violence? Your saying this is a sign of an uneducated or foolish person. Because Yajna is considered to be of two types, based on the difference between Aryan and non-Aryan. || 167-200 || In the beginning of this world, which is in the form of a field of action, the Supreme Brahma, Shri Vrishabhadeva Tirthankara, has explained in the Veda, which explains the true nature of the six substances, including Jiva, that there are three fires: Krodhagni, Kamagni, and Udaragni. Those Rishis, Yatis, Munis, and Anagaras, who are the best Dvijas, who reside in the forest, offering the oblations of forgiveness, detachment, and fasting in these fires, attain the eighth earth, the place of liberation, which gives the desired result. || 201-203 || Besides this, there are three fires born from the crown of Agni Kumar Indra, who is worthy of worship due to the merit of the Tirthankara, Ganadhara, and other Kevalis. Those who are very devoted and perform the best actions like donation, etc., and are ascetics, householders, who have attained the state of the Supreme Self, offer oblations to their fathers and grandfathers, reciting the mantras mentioned in the Veda, composed by the Rishis, with Akshata, fragrance, fruits, etc. This is called the second Aryan Yajna. Those who constantly perform this Yajna are Indra, Samanika, etc.
1 Shruti: Lo. 2 Ishyate: Mo, Lo. 3 In the book Kha, there is a change in the order of verses 201-202. 4 Sthitvarsha: Kha. 5 Anagaras.

Page #287:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

The second, the Shruta-Jnana (scriptural knowledge) Veda, is eternally existent. It has many divisions, based on the differences in the Dravya-Kshetra (substance-field) etc., or the five Kalyanakas of the Tirthankaras. Those who perform the Yajna (worship) of the Jina during these divisions, accumulate punya (merit) and, after enjoying its fruits, attain Siddhahood (liberation) in due course. 

This Yajna has been described by the Rishis as of two types, based on the Ashramas (stages of life) of the Muni (ascetic) and the Grihastha (householder). The first is the direct cause of liberation, and the second is the indirect cause of liberation through tradition. 

Thus, this tradition of the Deva-Yajna has continued, benefiting both worlds, and it continues to exist. 

However, in the Tirtha (pilgrimage) of Muni-Suvrata-Nath, there was an Asura (demon) named Mahakal, who harbored hatred for King Sagar. This ignorant being preached the Yajna of violence. 

Why did Mahakal do this? If you wish to know, listen. In this Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called Charan-Yugal. In it, King Suyodhan ruled. 

His queen was named Atithi, and they had a daughter named Sulasa. For her Swayamvara (self-choice of husband), many kings assembled in Charan-Yugal, at the behest of messengers. King Sagar of Ayodhya was also eager to attend the Swayamvara, but he had a white hair in his hair. The oil-applying attendant noticed it and realized it was very old. Knowing this, he became averse to attending the Swayamvara, feeling dispassionate. 

King Sagar had a foster mother named Mandodari, who was very clever. She went to Sagar and said, "This white hair is new, and it is telling you that you will gain some sacred object." At that time, a minister named Vishwabhu also arrived and said, "Just as Sulasa will desire you, I will skillfully arrange everything." 

Hearing the minister's words, King Sagar was very pleased. He set out for King Suyodhan's city with his four-fold army, and after a few days, he arrived there. Mandodari, Sagar's foster mother, had accompanied him. She went to Sulasa and praised King Sagar's lineage, beauty, splendor, valor, diplomacy, humility, wealth, relatives, and possessions, as well as his suitability. 

All this was understood by Sulasa, who was already inclined towards him.

Page #288:
---------------------------
260
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Knowing that the guest was insulting him with inappropriate words, the king of the beautiful city of Podanapur, the descendant of Bahubali, said, "My elder brother, Trina Pingala, is the best among the kings of the earth. His queen is Sarvayasha, and their son is Madhu Pingala, who is worthy of being a groom, possessing all the excellent qualities, and is still young. You should honor him with a garland today, rather than me." 223-225
"What do you have to do with the king of Saketa, who brings sorrow to his co-wives?" The guest said this, and Sulasa also agreed with her. 226
From that time onwards, the guest, Devi, prevented Mandodari from going near the girl by some means. 227
The nurse also told the king about the obstacle to the proposed marriage. The king then said to his minister, "What we desire, you must accomplish by all means." The minister, accepting the king's words, created a book called "Swayamvara Vidhana," which described the good and bad qualities of a groom. He bound that book in the form of a manuscript, placed it in a casket, and hid that casket in a forest near the city, burying it in the ground. He did this work with such care that no one knew about it. 227-231
After many days, while digging the earth of the forest, he found the casket by chance with the plow. He said, "I found this casket while digging as desired. This is some ancient scripture." Saying this, he pretended to be surprised, as if he didn't know anything. He read that book in the assembly of the princes. It was written in it that in the assembly of the girl and the grooms, one whose eyes are white and yellow should not be honored with a garland. Otherwise, the girl will die or the groom will die. Therefore, a sinful, fearful, and shameful man should not enter the assembly. If any sinful man enters, he should be expelled. 232-235
Hearing all this, Madhu Pingala, being ashamed and possessing all those qualities, left from there and went to his guru, Harishena, and performed penance.

Page #289:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

Knowing this, King Sagara, Vishwabhu, his minister, and others with crooked intentions, were filled with joy.  || 237 || The brothers of Madhupingala and other good men were filled with sorrow at that time.  The greedy do not see the great sin accumulated by deceit. || 238 || Then, after performing a great puja to the Jinas for eight days, he performed the coronation of his daughter, the excellent Sulasa. || 239 || After bathing and adorning her, on a pure tithi and day, the purohita, surrounded by handsome warriors, placed her in a chariot and took her to the Swayamvara mandap. || 240 || He then, in order, pointed out the kings seated on auspicious seats, distinguishing them by their lineage and caste. || 241 || She, being attracted to the king of Saketa, ignored all the other kings and went towards Sagara, placing a garland around his neck, adorning his body with it. || 242 || "This union is indeed ordained by fate," said the envious, their faces filled with displeasure. || 243 || After the completion of the marriage ceremony, the prosperous King Sagara, accompanied by Sulasa, remained there for some days. || 244 || Then, going to the city of Saketa, he lived happily, enjoying the pleasures of life.  Meanwhile, Madhupingala was practicing self-control. || 245 || One day, while going to a city for food, he was seen by a certain astrologer, who said, "This young man's signs are those of a king, but he is a beggar.  What is the use of these astrological signs?  They are all useless." || 246 || Hearing this criticism, another astrologer said, "He was indeed enjoying the wealth of a kingdom, but the minister of King Sagara, by showing him false signs, made him impure, and he, out of shame, took up asceticism.  After his departure, Sagara took Sulasa." || 247 || Hearing these words, the Muni Madhupingala was consumed by the fire of anger. || 248 || "By the fruits of this penance, I will destroy the entire lineage of King Sagara in the next birth," he decided, his mind filled with vengeance. || 249 || After the death of the king of the Asuras, the chief of the Asura army, there were sixty-four thousand Asura chiefs, each with a different rank. || 250 ||

Page #290:
---------------------------
262
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Mahakal was born, surrounded by his own gods. Remembering, he thought, "How did I come to this heaven?" 252
Knowing by the use of the knowledge of disintegration, his previous birth, 253
All that had happened, he was filled with anger, his mind filled with rage. 253
He had a deep hatred for the minister and the king, even though he did not want to kill them, he wanted to make them commit a terrible sin. 254
Thinking of the means and helpers, he came to earth, but he did not think about the great sin he was committing. Shame on his foolishness! 255
This is the nature, there is no other, this is the means to achieve his purpose. 256
In the Bharat Kshetra, in the Dhaval country, in the Jambudvipa, there is a city called Swastikavati. 256
King Vishavavasu, born in the Hari Vamsa, ruled it. 257
His wife was Srimati, and they had a son named Vasu. 257
In the same city, there lived a venerable Brahmin named Kshirakadamba, who was well-versed in all the scriptures and a renowned, excellent teacher. 258
His son, Parvat, Narada, who had come from another country, and Vasu, the king's son, were all studying together. 259
These three had attained the pinnacle of knowledge, but Parvat was foolish, he always grasped the opposite meaning due to the influence of delusion. 260
The other two students grasped the meaning as their teacher taught them. 260
One day, these three went to the forest with their teacher to collect darbha grass and other things. 261
There, on a rock in the mountain, sat the teacher, Shrutadhara. 261
The three munis were studying the eight-limbed knowledge of auspiciousness from him. 262
When the study of the eight-limbed knowledge of auspiciousness was complete, the three munis praised their teacher. 262
Seeing them seated, Shrutadhara Muni asked them to test their intelligence, "What are the names of these three students? What are their families? What are their intentions? And what will be their fate in the end? Tell me." 263-264
One of the three munis, an Atmajnanin, said, "Listen, this Vasu, the king's son, is very passionate... 265

Page #291:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

The one seated there, consumed by intense passions, will surely go to hell by deciding on violence as his dharma. The middle one, a Brahmin's son, spoke: "This one, named Parvata, is cruel, devoid of wisdom, and a teacher of the Mahakal doctrine. Having studied the Atharva Veda, a scripture promoting evil, he will lead people astray. He is ignorant, considering violence as dharma, and constantly engrossed in fierce meditation. He will lead many astray and thus go to hell."

The third one, seated behind, spoke: "This one, named Narada, is a wise Brahmin, devoted to dharma meditation. He will teach the dharma of non-violence to his followers. He will become the king of the city called Giri-Tatta and eventually renounce possessions, becoming an ascetic. He will attain the highest celestial abode."

Having heard the pronouncements of these three, Shruta-Dhara Muni said: "You have all understood my teachings correctly." He praised the three disciples. Meanwhile, Kshira-Kadamba, the Upadhyaya, seated under a tree, was listening intently. He thought: "The play of fate is indeed strange. These two, Parvata and Vasu, are destined for misfortune. May their evil deeds be cursed! What can I do about it?"

With these thoughts, he bowed respectfully to the Munis, still seated under the tree, and then, with a heavy heart, returned to the city with the three disciples.

After a year of studying scriptures and completing his childhood, Vasu's father, Vishvavasu, crowned him king and departed for the forest to practice austerities.

Vasu ruled the earth effortlessly, without any obstacles. One day, he went to the forest for a stroll. There, he saw many birds falling from the sky, colliding with something unseen. He was astonished and thought: "There must be a reason why these birds are falling from the sky."

He decided to investigate the cause of the birds' fall. He drew his bow and shot an arrow towards the spot. The arrow also fell to the ground, colliding with the same unseen object. The king, Vasu, went to the spot himself, accompanied by his charioteer. As he touched the place, he realized that it was a crystal pillar, invisible to the naked eye, blending seamlessly with the color of the sky.

Page #292:
---------------------------
264
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, King Vasu, having built a throne with four large pillars, ascended it and was served by kings and others. People were amazed and proclaimed, "Look, King Vasu sits in the sky on his throne, due to the greatness of truth!" ||28||

Meanwhile, Parvata and Narada went to the forest to gather fuel and flowers. They saw some peacocks drinking water from the river and Narada said to Parvata, "Oh Parvata, among these peacocks, one is a man and the rest are seven women." Hearing this, Parvata, unable to bear the thought of Narada's statement being true, made a bet. ||282-284||

Going a little further, Parvata realized that Narada's statement was true and was amazed. As they walked further, Narada, seeing the path of elephants, smiled and said, "The elephant that just passed by has a blind left eye." ||285-286||

Parvata said, "Your first statement was like a blind snake finding its way into a hole, it turned out to be true by chance. But this knowledge of yours is laughable. What can I say?" He said this with a smile and envy, and was filled with wonder. ||287-288||

To prove Narada wrong, Parvata followed the path of the elephant and before reaching the city, he realized that Narada's statement was true. ||289||

Parvata was filled with sorrow. He returned home, deeply troubled, and told his mother everything Narada had said. He said, "Father never explains the truth of the scriptures to me like Narada does. He always disrespects me." These words, born of envy and contrary thinking, pierced his mother's heart like a sharp weapon. The Brahmin woman, unable to bear her son's words, was filled with sorrow. ||290-292||

After bathing, performing Agnihotra, and eating, the Brahmin, sitting in his Brahminical state, heard his wife's account of Parvata's words. He said, "My teachings are for all men, without exception. Narada is skilled because he has different understandings." ||293||

Page #293:
---------------------------
The seventy-sixth chapter. By nature, your son is dull, do not be envious of Narada. To make this clear, Narada, in the presence of your son, [295] tell me, in what forest, while wandering, did you encounter the mountain's mischief?  [296]  He said, with great wonder, and with humility, "I was going to the forest, with the mountain, engaged in pleasant conversation. There, I saw peacocks, having drunk water, returning from the river. [297]  One peacock, fearing the weight of his moon-like feathers, soaked in water, turned back, placing his feet behind him. [298]  Many peacocks had gone, and the rest, drenched in water, were scolding them.  Seeing this, I guessed, and said to the mountain, 'One is a male, and the rest are females.' [299]  Then, from the middle of the forest, I came near a city.  [300]  There, I saw an elephant, while walking, her hind legs were wet with her own urine.  From this, I knew that it was a female elephant.  The trees and vines on her right side were broken.  From this, I knew that she was blind in her left eye.  A woman, tired from the journey, had gotten off her back, and was sleeping on the bank, desiring cool shade.  Seeing the marks made by her belly, I knew that she was pregnant.  One end of her sari was caught in a bush.  From this, I knew that she was wearing a white sari.  Where the elephant had stopped, a white flag was flying on the roof of the house.  From this, I guessed that she had a son.  In this way, I guessed all the things I said above." [301-304]  Hearing all this, the best Brahmin, in the presence of the Brahmin woman, revealed that he had no fault, and that he had given the same advice to both. [305]  At that time, the mountain's mother was also very happy to hear all this.  Then, the Brahmin, desiring to convince the mountain's mother of the words of the sages, [306]  sat alone with his son, the mountain, and his student, Narada, to test their character.  He made two goats out of dough, and gave them to the mountain and Narada, saying, "Take them to a place where no one can see, and worship them with sandalwood, garlands, and other auspicious things.  Then, cut off their ears, and bring them back here today." [307]  Then, the wicked mountain thought, "There is no one in this forest," and went to his father. [308]

Page #294:
---------------------------
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana:

The Vītaghṛṇa (compassionless) Parvata, filled with joy, informed his father that "I have done exactly as you instructed." (309)

Nārada also went to the forest, thinking that he should cut off the ears in a place unseen. But the guru had said "the cutting off of the duty", and here there is no unseen place, as the deities like the moon, sun, stars, and planets are always present, and the birds and animals are always nearby. (310-311)

Realizing that there is no place in the forest that is unseen by anyone, the noble-souled Nārada returned to the guru and said that due to the injunctions regarding name, meaning, intention, and action, he has brought this goat. (312-313)

Hearing this, the father contemplated the foolishness of his son and said that the view of the Ekāntavādins, who believe that an effect is solely determined by the cause, is mistaken. Sometimes the effect is in accordance with the cause, and sometimes it is otherwise. The truth is what the Syādvāda says. (314-316)

The wise teacher then placed Nārada in the position of an upādhyāya, saying that he, being subtle-minded and knowing the truth, is fit for this role. He honored Nārada and encouraged him with virtues. (317-318)

The father then spoke to his son, saying that without discrimination, he has done this improper act. Despite studying the scriptures, he lacks the discrimination between right and wrong action. How will he survive when I am no longer present? (319-320)

Thus, the father, though saddened, instructed the foolish Parvata. But the latter, being of dull intellect, became hostile towards Nārada, as is the way of the unintelligent. (321)

Page #295:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

"You should nurture them, O Bhadra, even in my absence, in every way." Thus spoke Vasu, and he was pleased by your grace. || 323 ||

"This is self-evident, why do you say this to me? There is no doubt in this, O Venerable One, as it should be. || 324 ||

"You are worthy to perform the rites for the next world," said the best of the twice-born, and the king honored him with a garland of fragrant flowers. || 325 ||

Then, having attained perfect restraint in the Kshirakadamba forest, he renounced all possessions at the end and attained the highest realm of the gods. || 326 ||

The mountain, too, being a scholar of all scriptures, sat in the place of his father and took delight in explaining all teachings. || 327 ||

In that very city, Narada, too, a learned man, accompanied by other learned men, shone with fame through his explanations, being established in subtle intellect. || 328 ||

As time passed for them, on one occasion, in a gathering of the virtuous, a great dispute arose regarding the interpretation of the phrase "Aja should be offered." || 329 ||

"A three-year-old barley seed, devoid of the power to sprout, is called Aja," said one. || 330 ||

"The wise say that the worship of the gods with the offerings made from its transformation is called Yajna," said Narada, following the established tradition. || 331 ||

"The mountain, however, declared that the word Aja refers to a particular kind of animal, and the offering of its transformed products in the fire is called Yajna," said the learned, following the tradition. || 332 ||

"Hearing the words of the two, the virtuous, led by the twice-born, said, 'This wicked mountain is envious of Narada, and therefore he is saying that Dharma is established through the killing of living beings.' || 333 ||

"To establish this wicked doctrine, the mountain, filled with malice, said, 'He has fallen, he is unworthy, therefore, he is unfit for conversation or any other interaction.' || 334 ||

"Thus, with a slap of his palm, he scorned him in anger, and they proclaimed the fruit of such a wicked mind right there. || 335 ||

"Thus, rejected by all, the mountain, his pride broken, went to the forest. There, a demon named Mahakala was wandering, disguised as a Brahmin. At that time, he was old..." || 336 ||

Page #296:
---------------------------
268
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
1. He was carrying many burdens, like the steps of a ladder leading to Yama's abode. He was stumbling and falling like a blind man. 337
2. He had a few white hairs on his head and was wearing a white turban, as if he had put on a silver cap out of fear of Yama. 338
3. His eyes were half-closed, as if they were closing due to the pleasure of being with the old age woman. 339
4. He was moving like an elephant with a broken trunk, breathing heavily like an angry snake. 340
5. He could not see ahead, like a king's beloved man intoxicated with pride. His back was broken and he could not speak clearly. 341
6. He was carrying a three-stranded sacred thread, as if he was ready to speak about the enmity he had with the king of the world, Sagara, and his daughter Sulasa. He was searching for a suitable reason to fulfill his intention. 342
7. Mahakaala, while wandering on the mountain, saw the son of Ksheerakadambuka, the mountain. Mahakaala, disguised as a Brahmin, went to the mountain and bowed to him. The mountain also greeted him. 343
8. Mahakaala, reassuring him, said with respect, "May you be well." Then, pretending to be unaware, Mahakaala asked the mountain, "Where have you come from and why are you wandering in the middle of this forest?" The mountain then narrated his entire story from the beginning. 344
9. Hearing this, Mahakaala thought, "This one is capable of destroying my enemy, the king. He is my co-religionist." With this thought, the wicked Mahakaala, who was an expert in deception, said to the mountain, "O mountain! Your father, Sthandila, Vishnu, Upamanyu, and I, all studied scriptures under the guidance of Bhouma. Therefore, your father is my Dharma brother. I came here to see him, but unfortunately, it was in vain. Don't be afraid, I will help you destroy your enemy." 345
10. Thus, Mahakaala followed the wishes of the son of Ksheerakadambuka, the mountain, and the sixty thousand Atharva Vedic mantras. 346

Page #297:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

266. The mountain, having been taught the secrets of the Vedas by the 1000 ṛcas, said, "By the mantras mentioned earlier, actions of peace, prosperity, and sorcery can be performed. When these are performed with the help of fire intensified by wind, they yield the desired fruit, even if they are obtained by the killing of animals." 352. "Therefore, let us go to Saketa and perform a yajña that will yield peace and other fruits. We will begin with the killing of animals and establish our influence." 353. Having said this, Mahakal, in order to destroy his enemies, sent his cruel Asuras, the sons of Diti, to the kingdom of Sagara, saying, "Cause suffering there with severe fevers and other ailments." 354. Having sent the Asuras, he went to the city of Sagara with the mountain. There, after seeing Sagara, he blessed him with mantras and said, "I will quickly remove the great misfortune that is happening in your kingdom by performing a yajña with mantras." 355-356. "The Lord created animals for the sake of the yajña. Therefore, there is no sin in killing them, but only merit, which is the means of attaining the great happiness of heaven." 357. Having convinced him in this way, the wicked one said, "Gather sixty thousand animals for the success of the yajña, and also other things suitable for the yajña." 358. The king also gave him all the things he asked for. 359. Having begun the yajña, the mountain began to chant mantras over the creatures and throw them into the fire. At the same time, Mahakal showed the creatures being carried away in vimanas, along with their bodies, to heaven, and convinced the people that all the animals had gone to heaven. At that time, he also removed all the misfortunes and calamities from the country. 360-361. Seeing this, many simple people were deceived by his trickery and, desiring to attain heaven, wished to die in the yajña. 362. When the yajña was completed, the wicked mountain, according to the rules, offered a horse of excellent breed and, by the king's order, his queen, Sulasa, to the fire. 363. The king, whose body was consumed by the fire of grief caused by the separation from his beloved wife, entered his capital. 364. Having laid down his body on the bed, he began to doubt, "Is this great killing of creatures dharma or adharma?" 365. Doubting in this way, he, along with others, went to the great sage, Yativara. After bowing to him, he said, "O Bhattaraka, tell me what has happened." 366.

Page #298:
---------------------------
270
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the king asked the muni, "O Muni, is this act of mine virtuous or sinful? Please tell me." The muni replied, "This act is condemned by the Dharma Shastra. This act itself will send the doer to the seventh hell. You will know this on the seventh day when the earth will fall. This will be the sign that you have attained the seventh earth." The king, believing the muni's words, told the Brahmin-mountain about it. 
366-369
The mountain, hearing the king's words, said, "He is a mendicant. What does that naked ascetic know? But if you have doubts, we will provide you with peace of mind." 
370
With these words, the king's mind was calmed, and he resumed the yagna that he had stopped. On the seventh day, the sinful Asura showed the king that Sulasa, having attained the state of a deva, was standing in the sky, along with the animals that had been sacrificed earlier. She was telling King Sagar, "I have attained this state of a deva as a result of dying in the yagna. I have come here in my chariot to tell you this joyful news." 
371-373
The devas were pleased with the yagna, and the pitris were satisfied. Hearing these words, Sagar thought, "The result of dying in the yagna is clearly visible. Therefore, the Jain muni's words are false." 
374
At that time, due to his attachment to violence and hatred for the true Dharma, the consequences of his actions, arising from the difference between the root nature and the subsequent natures, manifested. The eight karmas, starting with the karma of hellish life, became firmly established in their appropriate positions, along with their respective binding and unbinding aspects. 
375-377
At that moment, a terrifying thunderbolt fell upon all the enemies, and King Sagar, along with all the beings involved in that act, died and was born in the seventh hell, the Raurava hell. The extremely wicked Mahakal, filled with intense anger, went to the hell with his winds of enmity to punish him. However, his descent was limited to the third hell. He searched for him there, but when he couldn't find him, he left mercilessly and began to devise a way to kill his enemies, including the minister Vishvabhu. He magically showed that King Sagar was sitting in a chariot with Sulasa, saying, "I have attained the mountain..." 
378-382

Page #299:
---------------------------
Saptashati Parva
271
The lord Bhava, the great intellect, has undertaken the great sacrifice. The gods residing in the celestial vehicles and the ancestors are in the sky-arena. \\383\\ By the illusion of the great Kala, it is clearly shown to all. O minister, you have performed this great sacrifice with great merit. \\384\\ Thereupon, the king of the earth, Vishvabhu, along with others, praised him. Narada and the ascetics, hearing this from the wicked one, \\385\\ said, "This evil path shown by the enemy is indeed condemned. He should be prevented by some means, as he is extremely learned in evil." \\386\\ Thus, all of them, coming together, went to Saketa city. Seeing the minister, the sinful men, \\387\\ solely for the sake of wealth and desire, commit the slaughter of living beings. There are none who are killers of living beings for the sake of dharma. \\388\\ The knowers of the Vedas have declared non-violence in the Vedas, established by Brahma, like a creeper of wish-fulfilling tree, or like a friend beneficial to the world. \\389\\ If you desire the authority of the previous sages' words, then this act of slaughter, which is the cause of karmic bondage, should be abandoned. \\390\\ The ascetics, who are desirous of the welfare of all living beings, said this. Hearing this, Vishvabhu said, "O ascetics, how can the act, which is seen as the direct means to attain heaven, be condemned?" \\391\\ Then the fearful of sin, Narada, said, "O wise minister, why do you desire to uproot Sagara along with his entourage, thinking it to be the means to attain heaven?" \\392\\ "This is a deceptive means, seen to yield immediate fruit. It is a delusion for the deluded, devised by some magician." \\393\\ Then he told him to follow the scriptural injunctions on ethical conduct and fasting, as proclaimed by the Agamas. Hearing this from Narada, the mountain-like (Vishvabhu) said, \\395\\ "It is heard by you through the scripture spoken by the demon. Was he not deluded by Narada even earlier?" \\396\\ "And there is no other guru except my father, who is extremely devoted to me. Is he also envious of me today for some reason?" \\397\\

Page #300:
---------------------------
272
The Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, is renowned in the world, with the teachings of my revered Guru. The elder, by means of it, has expounded the secrets of the Shruti. ||398|| The fruit of the sacrifice, the death, has been revealed by me too. If you do not believe, then ask Vasu, the king who has crossed the ocean of the Vedas, and is renowned for truth. ||399|| Hearing this, Narada said, "What is the fault in asking Vasu?" ||400|| This is worth considering, if violence is considered a means of Dharma, then non-violence, charity, and good conduct will become causes of sin. ||401|| If, as you say, fishermen and other sinners have a good fate, then those who follow truth, Dharma, austerity, and celibacy should go to a lower fate. ||402|| Perhaps you will say that killing animals in a sacrifice is Dharma, but not elsewhere? This is not right, because killing causes equal suffering in both places, so the fruit should be the same. Who can stop it? Perhaps you believe that the Creator created animals for the sake of sacrifice, so there is no sin in killing them in a sacrifice? This is not right, because it is the desire of fools and condemned by the virtuous. ||403-405|| If you believe that Brahma created animals for the sake of sacrifice, then it is not right to use them for other purposes. Because whatever is created for a particular purpose, its use for other purposes is not right. Just as a medicine that cures phlegm, if used for other purposes, becomes harmful. Similarly, if animals created for sacrifice are used for buying and selling, etc., it should be considered a great sin. You want to argue, but you are weak, lacking in the strength of logic. Therefore, we come to you and say that just as a man who kills creatures with weapons, etc., is bound by sin, so also a man who kills creatures with mantras is bound by sin without any distinction. ||406-409|| Another thing is, does Brahma, who creates animals, etc., reveal them or create them anew? If he creates them anew, then how are celestial flowers, etc., non-existent things,

Page #301:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

273

Now, the objection to his statement is being expressed. Just as darkness is the obstruction to the lighting of a lamp, so too, there must be an obstruction to the manifestation of animals, etc., before their manifestation. ||4||

Hearing this, all of them praised him, saying, "Your statement that the creator does not create new animals, etc., but only manifests them, is not worthy of acceptance." ||12||

They all said, "If the dispute is settled by King Vasu, then let us go to him." Thus, all of them, along with Narada and the Mountain, went to the city of Svastikavati. ||13||

Knowing all this, the Mountain's mother, along with him, went to see King Vasu. She said, "This poor Mountain was entrusted to you by your Guru when he was going to the forest of penance. Today, he will have a dispute with Narada in your presence. If, by chance, he is defeated in this debate, then Yama's abode will be his only refuge. You should know this for sure." Thus, the Mountain's mother spoke to King Vasu. King Vasu, desiring to serve his Guru, said with great respect, "Mother, do not have any doubts about this. I will ensure the victory of the Mountain." Saying this, he dispelled the fear of the Mountain's mother. ||14-17||

The next day, King Vasu, standing on a throne made of sky-crystal, adorned with a lion's emblem, was seated in the royal court. At that time, all the ministers, including Vishvabhu, arrived in the court and asked, "Before you, there were four kings of the Hari-vamsa lineage, named Himagiri, Mahagir, Samagiri, and Vasugiri, who were always dedicated to the protection of ahimsa and other virtues." ||18-19||

After all of them passed away, King Vishvavasu came, and after him, you became the protector of ahimsa dharma. You are the truth-speaker, renowned in all three worlds. In any situation of doubt, you are like poison, fire, and a balance. O Lord! You are the one who creates faith, so please dispel our doubts. Narada has explained the nature of ahimsa dharma, and the Mountain contradicts him, claiming that violence is dharma. Now, please speak as your Guru, the Upadhyaya, has instructed you. ||20-24||

Why don't you make it? ||410||

Page #302:
---------------------------
274
Although the king, knowing the truth as instructed by the Guru's wife, was still deluded by the great delusion of Mahakal, the boundary of the last time, called Dushma, was near. He was engrossed in the fierce meditation of the joy of possessions, and said, "What the mountain has said is true. How can there be any obstacle in what is seen directly?" 420-426.

King Sagar, along with his queen, went to heaven by the sacrifice that the mountain had mentioned. Who would illuminate a lamp that is already burning and self-illuminating? 427.

Therefore, you people should abandon fear and do what the mountain is saying. That is the means to heaven. Thus, by the joy of violence, the king was bound to hell by the fierce meditation of the joy of violence. And the king, who was not afraid of the sin of false speech and slander, said these words. Hearing this, Narada and the ascetics said, "Oh, what a strange thing! Such terrible words are coming out of the king's mouth. There must be some extraordinary reason for this." At that very moment, the sky thundered, the rivers flowed backwards, the ponds dried up quickly, there was a continuous rain of blood, the rays of the sun became weak, all directions became polluted, creatures trembled in fear, the earth, making a loud noise, split into two, and the king's throne sank into that great chasm. Seeing this, the gods and the celestial beings standing in the sky said, "O wise king Vasu! Do not describe the path of destruction of Dharma by violating the eternal path." 428-434.

Seeing the mountain and king Vasu's faces pale due to the throne sinking into the earth, the servants of Mahakal, assuming the form of ascetics, said, "Do not be afraid." Saying this, they lifted the king's throne with their own power and showed it to the people. Although the king had sunk down with the throne, he insisted, "I am a knower of the truth, so how can I be afraid of this disturbance? I still say that the mountain's words are true." Saying this, he sank into the earth up to his neck. At that time, the saints and ascetics, although they had earnestly requested, "O king! This state of yours is due to false speech, so abandon it," the ignorant king, due to the fierce meditation of the joy of violence, did not abandon it.

Page #303:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Sixth Chapter

Even though he was obedient, he taught the right path. The earth, enraged, swallowed him, and he went to the seventh hell. ||439||

Then, to gain the trust of the world, the Asura took on the divine form of the kings, Sagra and Vasu, and said, "We both attained heaven through the faith of the Yagna, not by listening to Narada." Saying this, he disappeared. This event caused great sorrow and wonder among the people. Some said that King Sagra had gone to heaven, while others said that he had gone to hell. Thus, arguing among themselves, the minister Vishvambhu went home. ||440-441||

Then, at Prayag, he performed the Rajasuya Yagna. The kings of the great cities, like Mahapur, condemned the foolishness of the people and, with their minds fixed on the path shown by the Supreme Brahman, remained there for a few days. ||442-443||

At this time, the Dharma's boundaries were established by Narada himself. Therefore, everyone praised him greatly and bestowed upon him the city of Giritat. ||444||

The ascetics, seeing the destruction of compassion and Dharma, were very saddened and, understanding the greatness of the Kali Yuga, went to their respective ashrams. ||445||

Then, one day, a Vidyadhara named Dinakara came. Narada, with great love, said to him, "At this time, the mountain is behaving against all living beings. You should stop him." In reply, the Vidyadhara said, "I will surely stop him." Saying this, he summoned the Naga Kumaras, named Gandhara Panchanga, with his knowledge and told them the whole plan of obstructing the Yagna as it should be. The Naga Kumaras also killed the Daityas in the battle and disrupted the Yagna. ||446-447||

Seeing the obstruction of the Yagna, the minister Vishvambhu and the mountain sought refuge. By chance, they saw the Asura Mahakal standing in front of them. Seeing him, they told him all the news of the obstruction of the Yagna. Hearing this, Mahakal said, "This disturbance has been caused by the Naga Kumaras, who have enmity towards us." The knowledge of the Nagas is described in the Vidyavada. It is forbidden to expand them over the Jinavimbas, meaning that their power diminishes where the Jinavimbas are. ||448-451||

Therefore, you both should place beautiful images of the Jina in all four directions and worship them. Then, begin the ritual of the Yagna. ||452||

Thus, Mahakal gave this advice, and they both performed the Yagna accordingly. Again, the king of the birds came, intending to disrupt the Yagna. ||453||

Page #304:
---------------------------
276
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, I do not desire to see the Jainendra images, the knowledge. Narada, having taken refuge in his own abode, said to him. || 454 || The Yajna was completed without any obstacles, the Vishwabhu and the Parvata, both of them, at the end of their lives, suffered greatly in hell. || 455 || Mahakal, having fulfilled his purpose, revealed his true form and said, "In the previous birth, I was the king of Podana, Madhupingala. I committed this great sin for the sake of Sulasa. The Jinenrdras have spoken of the Dharma of non-violence, the righteous should follow it." Having said this, he disappeared. The compassionate one, taking upon himself the atonement for his evil deeds. || 456-458 || "The only atonement for the sinful deeds committed due to delusion is to renounce them. Vishwabhu and others, all those who were engaged in the Dharma of violence, went to hell due to their sins. Some, hearing the Dharma spoken by the Munis, who had divine knowledge, did not follow the wrong path shown by the Parvata, out of fear of sin. Some, whose lives were long, remained in that wrong path." || 459-461 || Hearing this Agama spoken by the minister, the Prime Minister, the king, and all the other members of the assembly praised the second minister greatly. || 462 || At that time, the king Dasharatha's powerful commander, Mahabala, said, "Whether it is virtue or sin in the Yajna, what is the use to us? It is better for us to show the influence of both the princes among the kings." Hearing this, King Dasharatha said, "We should consider this matter." Having said this, he dismissed the minister and the commander, and then asked the Purohit, who gave good advice, "Will the two princes be successful when they go to the house of King Janaka?" The Purohit, in accordance with the Puranas and the Mimansa Shastras, said, "There will be great prosperity for our two princes in that Yajna of King Janaka. You should not have any doubt about this. Besides, I have something else to say." || 463-467 || "It is this, that in this Bharat Kshetra, the descendants of Manu, the Tirthankaras, the Chakravartis, the kings of various realms, will be born with great power." || 468 || 

They both did it as per the ritual. After that, the king of the Vidyadharas, Dinakaradeva, came with the intention of disrupting the Yajna. Seeing the Jainendra images, he said to Narada, "My powers cannot work here." Saying this, he went to his own place. || 453-454 || In this way, the Yajna was completed without any obstacles.

Page #305:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Sixth Chapter

**277**

It has been heard from the learned sages of the Puranas, and I have also heard it before, that there are three types of Chakravartis (Chakravarti, Narayana, and Pratinarayana) and a great valiant Balabhadra. These two Kumaras, Rama and Keshava, are the eighth among those great souls.  || 469 ||

The wise, knowing the future, declared that they would kill Ravana. Hearing this, the king was filled with joy. || 470 ||

The cruel Mahakal, filled with anger and the sin of animal slaughter, instigated a violent sacrifice on earth, driven by his deceitful intellect. Therefore, King Vasu, along with the wicked mountain, went to the terrible hell. It is right, for those who indulge in evil deeds and follow the wrong path, hell is their rightful destination. || 471 ||

Driven by delusion, King Sagara, along with his queen Sulasa and his ministers, engaged in acts of violence, his heart devoid of the wisdom to discern the deceit of his enemies. He was destined to fall into the abyss, and his destruction was inevitable. What else can be expected of those who are engrossed in evil deeds? || 472 ||

Following the teachings of his great teacher, Sri Narada, who delivered beneficial advice, engaged in debates with learned assemblies, and received praise for his righteous words, achieved great penance, and was the best among the wise, attained the ultimate fulfillment. || 473 ||

Thus ends the sixty-sixth chapter of the Trishatti Lakshana Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which describes the unfolding of the wrong path.

Following the Guru
1. In beings, non-violence.

Page #306:
---------------------------
The Astaprashta Parva

The purohita, whose words and meanings are worthy of hearing and whose speech is full of essence, said to the king, "O King, you are worthy of hearing this story." Thus addressing the king, he began to narrate the story of Ravana, whose glory illuminated the ten directions like a radiant Lakshmi.

He said, "In the eastern part of the Dhataki-khanda island, in the Bharat-kshetra, there is a country called Sarasamuccaya, which is like heaven and endowed with the qualities of the earth."

"In its city of Nagapur, there reigned a king named Nardeva. One day, he went to the Ganadhara named Ananta, paid his respects, and listened to the Dharma-katha. He became detached and gave the kingdom to his eldest son, Bhogadeva, and embraced austerity. While practicing austerity, he saw the king of the Vidyadharas, named Chapalavega, and quickly made a decision. When his time came to an end, he renounced the world and became a deva in the Saudharma heaven."

"Now, in the same Bharat-kshetra of Jambudvipa, there is a great mountain called Vijayardha. On its southern slope, there is a city called Meghakuta. In this city, there reigned a Vidyadhara named Sahasragriva, born in the lineage of Vinamika. His brother's son was very strong, and in anger, he drove Sahasragriva out. Sahasragriva then went to Lanka and ruled there for thirty thousand years."

"His son was named Shatagriva. After Sahasragriva, he ruled for twenty-five thousand years. His son, Panchashatagriva, ruled for twenty thousand years after Shatagriva. After Panchashatagriva, there was a son named Pulatsya, who ruled for fifteen thousand years after his father. His wife was named Megha-shri. They had a son named Ravana, who was a deva. His lifespan was fourteen thousand years. After his father, he also began to rule the earth. One day, the lord of Lanka, Ravana, went to the forest with his wife to play and to enjoy the beauty of the Khecharachala."

Page #307:
---------------------------
The Ashta-Shat-Shat-Parva
276

Seeing the daughter of Amitvega, the king of the city of Stalaka on Mount Vijaya, who was engrossed in the pursuit of knowledge, the fickle Ravana was captivated by lust and infatuation. ||15||

That wicked soul, desiring to make her his own, destroyed her pursuit of knowledge. She, weakened by twelve years of fasting and hardship, ||15||

became enraged at the king of the celestial beings for being the cause of the obstruction to her attainment of knowledge. She resolved, "I will be born as the daughter of this king and surely destroy this foolish one." ||16||

Having made this resolution, she was born in the womb of Mandodari at the end of her life. At the time of her birth, there were great calamities like earthquakes. ||17||

Hearing the words of the astrologers, "Ravana will be destroyed by this daughter," the ten-headed Ravana was terrified. He immediately ordered his minister Maricha, "Take this sinful daughter and abandon her somewhere." ||18||

Obeying Ravana, Maricha went to Mandodari's house and said, "O Devi, I am very cruel. The king has entrusted me with this task." He then informed Mandodari of Ravana's order. ||19||

Mandodari replied, "I cannot disobey the king's order." ||20||

Saying this, she placed the girl in a casket with a lot of wealth. She repeatedly told Maricha, "O Maricha, your heart is naturally kind. Leave this girl in a place where she will not face any obstacles." ||21||

Wiping her tearful eyes, she handed over her daughter to him. Maricha took the casket and placed it in a conspicuous place near the garden of Mithila. ||23||

He then returned, dejected, having buried the casket in the earth. On that very day, some people were engaged in surveying the land for building a house. ||24||

While they were digging the ground with a plow, the casket came to the surface. The workers, surprised, informed King Janaka. ||25||

Seeing the beautiful girl inside the casket, King Janaka learned about her birth and the circumstances surrounding it from the letter. ||26||

He then named her Sita and said, "She will be your daughter," and happily gave her to Queen Vasudha. ||27||

Page #308:
---------------------------
280
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Vasudha, within the house of Vasudha, nurtured the artistic qualities of her daughter. This daughter was kept so secret that even the king of Lanka, Ravana, did not know of her existence. 
28
Furthermore, the news of King Janaka's yagna has not reached Ravana, so he will not be attending this festival. In this situation, King Janaka will surely give his daughter to Rama. 
29
Therefore, Rama and Lakshmana are both worthy of being sent to fetch the princess. Thus, following the advice of the learned priest, the king sent Rama and Lakshmana with his entire army. 
30
King Janaka, filled with affection, welcomed them. The wealth of their qualities, such as their beauty, is truly unparalleled, a result of the ripening of their immense merit accumulated in past lives. 
31
Thus, praised by the citizens, the two brothers, together, entered the city and stayed comfortably at the place designated by King Janaka. 
32
After a few days, when the assembly of kings arrived, in their presence, King Janaka completed the rituals of his desired yagna and, with great splendor, bestowed Sita upon Rama. 
33
For some days, Rama enjoyed the unparalleled bliss of being with Sita, like Lakshmi herself, in Janakpur, a bliss born of their newfound love. 
35
Then, following the advice of the ministers who had arrived from Ayodhya, Rama, with the permission of King Janaka, departed for Ayodhya on an auspicious day, accompanied by his family, Sita, and Lakshmana, filled with joy. They quickly reached Ayodhya. 
36
Upon their arrival, they were welcomed by their younger brothers, Bharata and Shatrughna, their relatives, and their family. Just as Indra enters his city, Amaravati, with great splendor, so too did the victorious Rama enter Ayodhya with great splendor. 
37
There, they met their parents, whose hearts were filled with joy, and greeted them with appropriate love. Then, Rama, whose fortune was ever increasing, resided happily with Sita and his younger brothers. 
38
At that time, spring arrived, further enhancing their celebration. The melodious songs of the cuckoos and the swarms of bees, like drums, adorned all directions. 
39
Kamadeva, who makes peace with the ascetics and weakens vows, carried the essence of harmony. 
40
He gave it to them. 
26-27
The queen, Vasudha, nurtured her daughter within the house of Vasudha, and developed her artistic qualities. This daughter was kept so secret that even the king of Lanka, Ravana, did not know of her existence.

Page #309:
---------------------------
## The Eighth and Sixty-fourth Festival

**281**

"Breaking the pride of the lustful, severely punishing the detached, and uniting the separated, the fierce Spring entered the world." (52)

"At its arrival, the species of forest dwellers, some sprouted, some were filled with affection with their leaves, some were adorned with buds, and some, like beloved women, laughed continuously with clusters of flowers." (43-44)

"The lunar orb, freed from the icy sheet, was clearly visible, spreading its luminous rays, bringing prosperity to all directions." (45)

"The south wind, carrying the best fragrance, scattered the pollen produced by flowers, blowing along with the particles of water from the lakes." (46)

"At that time, the highly skilled King Dasharatha, with the worship of Shri Jinendra Deva, performed the marriage of Ramachandra with seven beautiful maidens, and of Lakshmana with sixteen princesses, including the Earth Goddess." (47-48)

"Thereafter, both brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, enjoyed happiness with those women in all seasons, and those women enjoyed happiness with them. This is right, because virtue is the giver of happiness through external causes." (49)

"Thus, both brothers, eager to experience the happiness arising from their virtuous deeds, found an opportunity and spoke to King Dasharatha." (50)

"The city of Varanasi, in the land of Kashi, has been under our control since the time of our ancestors. But now it is without a master. If you permit, we will make it prosperous." (51)

"Hearing this, King Dasharatha said, "Bharata and others are unable to bear the separation from you two. In the past, our ancestors ruled the earth from this city of Ayodhya. Just as the sun and moon, though residing in one place, spread their light everywhere, so too, your brilliance, even while residing in one place, will spread throughout the earth. Therefore, why go? Do not go." (52-55)

Page #310:
---------------------------
282
Although the Great King Dasharatha had forbidden them to go to Banaras, they again said, "The great love that the King has for us is the only obstacle to our going." || 56 || As long as valor is possible and as long as virtue remains, those who desire success will not abandon the eagerness of enthusiasm. || 57 || The son of the king who desires to conquer his enemies should know well the intellect, power, means, victory, the alternative of qualities, and the differences in nature of the people or ministers, etc. Intellect is said to be of two kinds: one arising from nature and the other arising from humility. || 58-59 || Power is said to be of three kinds: one is the power of mantras, the second is the power of enthusiasm, and the third is the power of dominion. The decision of the mantra is made by the five limbs: the helper, the means, the division of the country, the division of time, and the counteraction of the adverse cause. The power of the mantra is explained in the scriptures. || 60 || Those who know power consider the enthusiasm arising from valor to be the power of enthusiasm. The abundance of wealth (treasury) and punishment (army) that the king has is called the power of dominion. || 61 || Scholars of political science call these four means: conciliation, gift, dissension, and punishment. By these, kings achieve their purpose. || 62 || Speaking words that are pleasing and beneficial, and embracing the body, etc., is called conciliation. Giving elephants, horses, land, and jewels, etc., is considered a gift. To make one's work accepted by creating dissension among the people is called dissension. Stealing the grass, etc., necessary materials of the enemy, causing their death, setting fire to them, hiding something, or completely destroying it, etc., all the actions that destroy the enemy are called punishment by the wise. The unimpeded tendency of the senses towards their respective objects, and the fear of the enemy, such as lust, etc., is called the victory of the victorious man. || 63-65 || Treaty, war, seat, vehicle, refuge, and duality are the six qualities of the king. These six qualities are dear to Lakshmi. The friendship that arises between two kings who are at war, for some reason, is called a treaty. This treaty is of two kinds: with a limit - for a certain time, and without a limit - forever. The mutual harm that the enemy and the other king who wants to conquer him do to each other is called war.

Page #311:
---------------------------
## The Eighty-Sixth Chapter

**69.**  The king who remains silent, thinking, "I am not capable of harming anyone else, nor is anyone else capable of harming me," is said to be in the state of *Āsana*. This *Āsana* is the cause of the king's growth.

**70.**  The effort made by the king towards his own growth and the destruction of his enemy is called *Yāna*. This *Yāna* yields the fruit of growth and the destruction of the enemy.

**71.**  To provide shelter to the one who has no other refuge is called *Saṃśraya*. To create harmony and discord among enemies is called *Dvaidhibhāva*.

**72.**  The king's seven *Prakṛtis* are: the king himself, the minister, the land, the treasury, the punishment, the fort, and the friend.

**73.**  Wise people consider these things to be the causes of the stability of the kingdom. Although these are all causes, the use of power with the help of strategies like *Sāma* etc. is the primary cause.

**74.**  Just as water is obtained by digging and fire is obtained by rubbing, so too, through effort, even the invisible, excellent fruit can be obtained.

**75.**  Just as birds abandon a mango tree that is devoid of fruit and flowers, and wise people abandon the taught false scriptures, so too, a prince lacking enthusiasm is abandoned by great fortune. Not only that, but his own warriors, vassals, and ministers also abandon him.

**76.**  Similarly, a father is saddened by a son who is lacking in effort, considering him unfit.

**77.**  Hearing this declaration, the king, at that time, said to the two young men, "What you have said is worthy of your lineage."

**78.**  Thus, filled with joy, he himself, the future *Balabhadra*, placed the crown fit for the kingdom on the head of *Lakṣmaṇa*.

**79.**  Awakening the great strength of the *Yauvarāja*, he bestowed upon him the authority of the *Yauvarāja*.

**80.**  Encouraging his sons with blessings for great success, he sent them towards the city of *Vārāṇasī*.

**81.**  Going and entering that city, they greatly pleased the citizens and the people of the country with gifts, honor, and other things.

**82.**  They always suppressed the wicked and protected the righteous, were knowledgeable in ethics, and never violated the ancient traditions.

**83.**  Their primary duty was the protection of the people. They were fulfilled, having accomplished all their tasks, or they would begin a task and complete it without fail. Thus, they lived for many auspicious kalpas, free from sorrow and providing happiness.

Page #312:
---------------------------
##  Chapter 284

**The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

Here, in Lanka, the ruler of the Trikhand Bharatavarsha, Ravana, was filled with pride, like the sun on a mountain peak. He considered himself the supreme lord.  He was called Ravana because he made his enemies weep. His brilliance and power had eclipsed the sun. 

His feet, adorned with sparkling jewels, bloomed like lotuses in the water of the rays emanating from the crowns of his submissive vassals who had come to pay their respects. He sat on his throne, surrounded by waving chamaras, resembling a dark cloud descending upon the earth. He spoke with a fierce expression, his brow furrowed, surrounded by his brothers, sons, and warriors. 

His saffron robes were illuminated by the brilliance of his long, matted hair. His fingers were adorned with a string of lapis lazuli beads, and he carried a water pot made of ruby, filled with holy water. His body was purified by the sacred thread of gold. 

One day, Narada, who had come from the heavens, saw Ravana near his palace gate.  Seeing him, Ravana said, "Oh, Bhadra, it's been a long time! Please, sit down. Where have you come from, and what brings you here?"

Asked thus by Ravana, the cunning Narada replied, "Oh, Dashaanan, you who are like a lion in destroying the arrogant and powerful kings, listen carefully to what I have to say, with a steady mind."

"Oh, King, I have come here today from Varanasi. The king of that city is Rama, the son of Dasharatha, the sun of the Ikshvaku dynasty. He is renowned for his lineage, beauty, youth, knowledge, valor, and truthfulness. He is destined for great fortune and prosperity. King Janaka of Mithila, under the pretext of a yagna, invited him and gave him his daughter Sita, who is like Lakshmi herself. She is so beautiful that even the mention of her name captivates the hearts of the most arrogant and lustful. She embodies all the virtues of women in the world."

Page #313:
---------------------------
Ashtashashtam Parva
The entire universe is delighted by her mere sight. She is capable of conquering even the bride of liberation at the end of sensual enjoyment. 'She is worthy of you, the one with the three-fold unbroken prosperity.' Just as the lord of Mithila took his own daughter Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. Residing near him, out of forbearance, to behold that one of vast splendor. Nārada, the king of birds, said, 'I have come here out of love.' It is said that the eyes of the lustful do not see, they only desire. With the words about Sītā's connection, his mind was tormented by the arrows of Cupid. 'She is worthy to stay only with me, the fortunate one, not the unfortunate.' As the abode of Mandākinī is beyond the great ocean, so will I forcibly take her from the very weak Rāma and hold her on my chest like a restless garland of flowers. Hearing this, the evil-minded one, the lord of the wicked, thought in his assembly that this is the way of the villains. That Nārada again kindled the blazing fire of his anger, saying that Rāma, established in the position of the great king, and Lakshmana, his brother, are in the position of the crown prince. Entering Vārānasī, they were honored by the lords of the world with their own daughters. Hearing this, Rāvana, bearing a mocking smile, said, 'O sage, you will soon hear of my prowess.' Dismissing him, he entered the council chamber and thought, 'This task is to be accomplished by some means, not by force. The wise can take away even the prosperity of the greatest of men by means.'

Page #314:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:

286. In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana, it is stated by the wise that the illustrious one (Sita) is obtained by a suitable means. Therefore, the two sons of Dasharatha, who are desirous of conquering my position and eager to destroy the wicked ones, have a wife named Sita, the consort of the evil-minded Rama. 113. "I shall abduct her, and then devise a proper means to kill them." Thus spoke the deceitful Maricha. 114. "Listen, O venerable lord, there are two duties of a minister: to promote beneficial activities and to prohibit harmful ones." 115. "The task you have determined is undesirable, brings infamy, is associated with sin, is difficult to accomplish, is unworthy, and is condemned by the virtuous." 116-117. "Abduction of another's wife is the greatest of all sins. Which noble-born person would ever contemplate such an unrighteous act?" 118. "There are other means to destroy your lineage, so what is the use of this evil deed, which is like a comet, being the sole cause of the destruction of your dynasty?" 119. Hearing this meaningful speech of Maricha, the king, being near death, did not accept it, just as a sick person does not accept medicine. 120. "Why, O minister, do you speak these unwelcome words that harm the desired object?" 121. "If you know, tell me the means to abduct Sita." Maricha replied, "If this is your firm resolve, then first ascertain through an intermediary whether she is devoted to you. If so, she can be brought by some gentle means; if averse, then, O lord, she may be forcibly seized." 122-123. Hearing this, the king praised it, saying "Well said, well said." 124. Then the cowardly one summoned Surpanakha and said, "By some means, make Sita attached to me." 125. She joyfully agreed and swiftly went to the city of Varanasi. 126. Then Rama, accompanied by Sita, went to the beautiful Chitrakuta, to reside there in the spring season.

Page #315:
---------------------------
Ashtashashtam Parva
127. Wandering in the midst of the forest, they beheld various trees and plants. They saw a creeper that was adorned with flowers and appeared to be smiling, and which was also endowed with tender leaves, seeming to be imbued with passion.
128. Gazing at that slender creeper, which seemed like another beloved, the Janaki-eyed one (Sita) looked at it with a touch of anger. 
129. "She is angry without any reason," he said. "Look, O bee, how intensely you are attached to the flowers of this creeper, just as I am attached to your lotus-like face."
130. "These Ashoka trees are trying to please her with their fresh, new flowers, just as I wish to please you."
131. "For the delight of my bee-like eyes, adorn your head with these flowers. And for you too, O creeper-like one, I shall make ornaments from these flowers and sprouts."
132. Seeing the lady thus rendered mute by anger, the king again addressed her with sweet and pleasing words.
133-134. "Gazing at your face in the mirror, your eyes have become fulfilled. Your nose is fully satisfied by the fragrance of your own lips. 
135. Your ears are filled with the melodious conversations, and your tongue is no longer desirous of other tastes, having been satisfied by the nectar of your own lips.
136-137. Your hands, having embraced your firm breasts, are fully content. And your mind, having attained fulfillment of all the senses, is now completely satisfied. Thus, you are now self-fulfilled, like a perfected being. Yet, my dear, is your anger justified?"
138. Then, having attained the novel delight arising from all the senses, even the king's anger at times became a source of joy.
139. There, even Lakshmana was enjoying with his beloved ones, and Kamadeva was bestowing upon them the happiness they desired.
140. Thus, for a long time, Rama said to his beloved, "Look, the sun with its rays is scorching the heads of all. How can I provide relief?"

Page #316:
---------------------------
288
These trees, like enemies defeated by Lakshmana's attack and prowess, are absorbed in their own shade. ||15||
Like the families of enemy kings, these deer with their fawns are wandering about, scorched and unable to find shelter anywhere. ||12||
Thus, delighting Sita with words that stole her heart, Ramachandra, like Indra with Sachi, began to enjoy the forest with her. ||143||
Seeing Sita somewhat distressed, Ramachandra approached a lake and sprinkled her with cool drops of water released from a device. ||144||
Seeing Sita's lotus-like face, radiant with slightly closed, playful eyes, Ramachandra was greatly pleased. ||145||
It is fitting that the wise Ramachandra, eager to embrace Sita, entered the water up to his chest, for clever people understand gestures well. ||146||
Many bees, abandoning the lotus, flew together to Sita's lotus-like face. Seeing her agitated by them, Ramachandra was both distressed and pleased. ||147||
Thus, after playing for a long time and fulfilling their desires, Ramachandra and his inner court settled in a pleasant spot in the forest. ||148||
At that time, Surpanakha arrived and, seeing the unparalleled beauty of the two princes, was captivated by them and filled with wonder. ||149||
Sita was standing beneath a beautiful Ashoka tree, laden with heavy fruits, on a floor of green gem-like stones, adorned by her companions, making her look like the goddess of the forest. Seeing her, Surpanakha said, "It is fitting that Ravana should love her." ||150-151||
She had become an old woman through the power of transformation, making it seem as if she had changed her form out of shame at seeing Sita's beauty. ||152||
The poets described her form in this way, and with curiosity, they believed that the Creator had not made her form with skill, but rather it had come about naturally. If this were not the case, why would he not have created another form like it? ||153||
Seeing the old woman, who was extremely worn out due to old age, the other queens, filled with youth, laughed at her, while Sita, on the other hand, was not affected by her appearance. ||154||
It is fitting that all are being drenched by the rays, for who can be peaceful when they are carrying the burden of a fierce nature on their head? ||140||

Page #317:
---------------------------
Ashtashashti Parva
286

Who are you and where have you come from? - she asked in a mocking tone. I am the mother of the gardener, she replied. 

Thereafter, to test their minds, she spoke again: O venerable ones! The other women, besides you, are devoid of merit, while you are the ones blessed with virtue, for you always indulge in pleasures with these princes. Tell me, what pious deed did you perform in your previous birth, which I shall also do, so that I may become the queen of this king and estrange him from other queens.

Hearing her words, those women laughed, saying: Her body is afflicted by old age, but her mind is still youthful and agitated by desire.

In response, the old woman said: You, who are endowed with the glory of your family, beauty and skills, should not laugh. The fruit of equal love that you have attained is the greatest fruit of birth. 

She continued: If this is the fruit of your birth, then today we shall unite you with your respective husbands in a proper manner. You shall become the chief queen without any hesitation.

Seeing the old woman becoming the target of their laughter like arrows, Sita, out of compassion, asked: Why do you desire womanhood? It seems you do not even understand your own good.

Those queens, experiencing the state of womanhood, have attained the inauspicious fruit in this world. O foolish one! This female state is the fruit of great sin. Listen, if a girl's characteristics are not good, no man accepts her, so she has to remain in her home out of sorrow. Besides, she has to protect her family's honor until death.

If someone remains childless, there is sorrow in both the families she has entered and the one she was born in. If, due to misfortune, she becomes barren, she loses her dignity. 

If a woman becomes unfortunate or unattractive, her husband abandons her, leading to constant disrespect. Due to the impurity of menstruation, she becomes untouchable. If the husband abandons her due to conflicts, etc., she has to suffer the anguish of the forest fire, like the trees. Not to speak of others, even the daughter of a emperor has to serve others.

Page #318:
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):

In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana:

The diminution of respect is observed in co-wives due to the superiority of one. Their innate nature, speech, body, and mind are always crooked. (169)

The affliction caused by diseases arising from pregnancy and childbirth, the grief over the birth of a daughter, and the unhappiness over the death of a child. (170)

Exclusion from secret activities, dependence in all affairs, the state of being a widow leading to great suffering due to malicious acts. (171)

Lack of prominence in charitable, vow-observing, and other-worldly beneficial activities, and failure to obtain progeny. (172)

The destruction of the lineage, lack of liberation, and other such demerits - how did this common to all of you come about? (173)

In this state of affairs, you have the desire for happiness, but you do not consider the future welfare due to the perversion of your intellect. (174)

In the state of being a woman, the sole praiseworthy quality is the chastity towards one's husband, even if he is deformed, diseased, destitute, of bad nature, or behaves badly. Discarding him and desiring another, even a Chakravarti, is like desiring a leper or an outcaste. (175-176)

Overpowering such a desire for enjoyment, the virtuous women quickly reduce him to ashes through the venom of their chastity. (177)

Hearing these words, Mandodari became perturbed, thinking that it is possible to shake the Mandara or Sumeru mountains, but not her mind. (178)

Forgetting her household duties due to hearing your words, she said, "I am going, O Devi," and bowing at your feet, she departed. (179)

Dejected due to the incompletion of her task, she approached Ravana. For those whose endeavors are impossible, what other fruit can there be except suffering? (180)

Seeing him, Sita, the virtuous one, said, "He cannot be broken by anyone, like a thunderbolt." (181)

After narrating her account, she said, "I did not say that the chaste Sita is afraid of the fire of anger." (182)

Page #319:
---------------------------
## Aṣṭaṣaṣṭi Parva

183. Hearing all that speech, Ravana, understanding it to be all false, manifested the fire of anger with his gestures and facial expressions. 
184. O foolish one! Who, even a poison-speaker, would abandon the capture of a serpent, seeing its breath and the expansion of its hood?
185. Having heard your words of external composure, you were afraid and came back. Do you not know that the minds of women are as fickle as an elephant's ears?
186. I do not know why you did not penetrate her mind. You appear to be skilled in strategy, but you are not. Thus, Ravana rebuked Shurpanakha.
187. In response, Shurpanakha said, "If I had tried to win his heart through the objects of enjoyment and enjoyment, then the things that are with Ramachandra there would not be found even in a dream elsewhere."
188. "If I had tried to win him over through valor and the like, there is no man like Ramachandra in valor. If I had tried to subdue him through the veena and the like, he himself is proficient in all arts and qualities."
189. "It is easier for those standing on the earth to catch the sun with their palms, a child can easily steal Seshanaga from the netherworld, and the earth along with the oceans can be lifted up."
190. "But it is impossible for even Kamadeva to penetrate the mind of a virtuous woman."
191. Hearing these words of Shurpanakha, Ravana, with the rise of evil deeds, mounted the Pushpaka chariot and, along with his minister, went up into the sky, displaying his splendor with pure banners.
192. The Pushpaka chariot, with its new, glass-like banners that laughed like snakes, was creating doubt in people's minds, "This is a flock of swans." The chariot, with its tinkling sound of small golden bells, was making the directions resound.
193. The Pushpaka chariot, with its close embrace of the clouds, was like a reunion of separated brothers, and it was moving forward, adorned with wealth and wealth-adorned friends.
194. The Pushpaka chariot, with its flagstaff piercing the clouds, was shedding small drops of water from the broken clouds, and the gentle wind was carrying them away, thus removing all the fatigue of Ravana's journey.
195. Ravana, seated in the Pushpaka chariot, was looking like a blue cloud amidst the clouds of autumn, as he went, eager to see Sita.
196. When he entered the main forest of Chitrakuta, which is full of joy, he felt as satisfied as if he had entered Sita's mind.

Page #320:
---------------------------
292
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, Maricha, at the behest of Ravana, assumed the form of a young deer. Having become a deer, he showed himself to Sita. || 197 || Seeing that charming deer, Sita said to Rama, "Oh Lord! Look at this wonderful sight! This deer, with its many colors, is captivating our hearts." || 198 || Hearing Sita's words, Rama, in his eagerness to fulfill her wish, went to capture the deer. || 199 || He would sometimes turn his head and look back, sometimes leap far, sometimes walk slowly, sometimes run, and sometimes, fearless, he would eat the grass. || 200 || Sometimes he would come so close that he could be caught by hand, and sometimes he would leap far away. Seeing his antics, Rama said, "This is a magical deer, deceiving me in vain, and difficult to catch." Saying this, Rama followed him, but soon the deer leaped into the sky. It is right, for how can those whose minds are under the control of women think about what they should do? || 201-202 || Just as a snake kept inside a pot suffers, so Rama, looking up at the sky and lamenting his own weakness, stood there, bewildered. || 203 || Then, Ravana, assuming the form of Rama, went to Sita and said, "I have captured the deer and sent it ahead." || 204 || "Oh beloved! It is now evening. Look, the western sky, holding the sun, is adorned as if it has a mark of vermillion." || 205 || "Therefore, oh beautiful one! Quickly mount the beautiful palanquin, for it is time to return to the city to spend a pleasant night." || 206 || Hearing Ravana's words, Sita, under the influence of illusion, mounted the palanquin, which Ravana had magically transformed into a Pushpaka Vimana. || 207 || To deceive Sita, Ravana showed himself as Rama riding a horse, as if he were walking on earth. || 208 || Thus, the wicked Ravana, skilled in magic, took Sita, the foremost among virtuous women, to her death, like a serpent. || 209 || Reaching a forest, he gradually lowered her down and immediately dispelled the illusion, revealing the plan of her abduction. || 210 ||

Page #321:
---------------------------
The Astashashta Parva

263. The Acharya revealed his body, radiant like an indigo gem, to his disciple lineage, revealing a profound meaning after a long time. || 21 ||

212. Overwhelmed by fear, shame, and the sorrow arising from Rama's separation, the daughter of the King of Mithila fainted, unable to bear the intense suffering. || 212 ||

213. Fearing that her celestial knowledge would vanish upon contact with a chaste woman, Janaki refrained from touching Sita. || 213 ||

214. The skilled celestial nymphs, gathering together, applied cool water and air to revive Sita from her faint. || 214 ||

215. Recovering from her faint through their efforts, the daughter of the earth, filled with doubt, asked, "Who are you? And what is this place?" || 215 ||

216. "We are celestial nymphs," they replied, "This is the enchanting city of Lanka, the forest of Ravana, the king of the three worlds." || 216 ||

217. "No woman in the world is as virtuous as you. Just as Indrani took Indra as her husband, Subhadra took Bharata Chakravarti, and Shri took Vajraji, you too are destined to be the wife of Ravana." || 217 ||

218. "You are the mistress of Ravana, the possessor of great fortune, by virtue of your good fortune." || 218 ||

219. Hearing this, Janaki, filled with sorrow and a heavy heart, said, "Did Indrani and others obtain their husbands by compromising their virtue?" || 219 ||

220. "Who would sell their virtues for wealth, even for their own lives? Ravana may be the king of three worlds, or even six, or even the entire universe, but what is the use if he violates my virtue, my ornament? For the virtuous, life is not the most precious thing, but virtue is more precious than life itself." || 220 ||

221. "I will protect these virtues, my life force, even at the cost of my life. This mortal body may perish, but my virtue, emulating the unshakeable mountains, will never be destroyed." || 221 ||

222. Giving this reply, Sita, embracing her vow, declared, "I will not speak, nor will I eat, until I hear news of Rama's well-being." || 222 ||

223. Having understood the difference between the true and the false, and having discarded all but a few ornaments, Sita, contemplating the true nature of existence, remained steadfast in her resolve. || 223 ||

224. The process of bringing him closer was indicated. Just as an Acharya reveals a profound meaning to his disciple lineage after a long time, so too did he reveal his body, radiant like an indigo gem, to Sita after a long time. || 210-211 ||

Page #322:
---------------------------
294
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, many ominous omens arose in Lanka, like the servants of Yama, the god of death. These were signs of the destruction of the king.  || 226 ||
Just as a green shoot grows near a goat tied in a sacrificial hall, a Chakra Ratna, like the Wheel of Time, appeared in Ravana's armory.  || 227 ||
The king of the Vidhyadharas, Ravana, did not understand the meaning of this auspicious event. He did not know that it would lead to his downfall. The great Chakra, with its blazing aura, filled him with great joy.  || 228 ||
The ministers advised him, saying, "Rama is a powerful and valiant warrior, and his younger brother Lakshmana is also a divine being. Their power is growing, and they are destined for great success. Sita is a virtuous woman, and she will never be yours. The rejection of virtuous women brings its own retribution in this very life. Moreover, there are many ominous omens in the city, portending misfortune. This evil act will bring harm to both worlds and bring shame upon you for ages to come. Abandon this wicked plan before it becomes public knowledge." || 229-232 ||
Ravana retorted, "Why do you speak such foolish words, contradicting all logic? What need is there for deliberation when the matter is so clear? The Chakra Ratna appeared after I abducted Sita. This means that the dominion of the three kingdoms is now mine. Who would be foolish enough to reject Lakshmi, who has come to their doorstep?"  || 233-235 ||
Meanwhile, Rama, following the illusory deer made of gems, had wandered far into the forest. He lost his way and the sun began to set. His companions searched for him and Sita, but they were nowhere to be found. They were filled with grief and despair.  || 236-237 ||
As the sun rose, the eye of the mortal world, darkness fled in fear. The lotus flowers bloomed, and the male and female swans, who had been separated by the night, reunited in joy. Just as meaning is associated with sound, or virtue with Janaki (Sita),  || 238-239 ||

Page #323:
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter of the Sixty-Fourth Book
265
Seeing his family, even the sun, or the day, the king, full of anxiety, asked, "Where is my beloved Sita?"  || 240 ||
"We have not seen either the god or the goddess," replied the family. "The goddess was like a shadow to you, so you must know where she went." || 241 ||
Hearing these words, Rama was overcome by a swoon, like Sita's co-wife, momentarily bewildering his mind. || 242 ||
Then, like Sita's friend, the cooling treatment quickly separated the king from the swoon, and he awoke, saying, "Where is Sita?" || 243 ||
All the family searched everywhere, looking for her, and found a piece of her upper garment torn and caught in a bush. They brought it to Rama and said, "This is the goddess's upper garment, how did it get here?" || 244 ||
Knowing the truth, Rama's mind was filled with sorrow, and he sat there, full of anxiety, with his younger brother. || 246 ||
At that moment, a messenger, overwhelmed with anxiety, arrived from King Dasharatha. He bowed his head and spoke to Rama, saying, "My lord, King Dasharatha had a dream. He saw Rahu carrying off Rohini to another sky, and the moon, alone, wandering in the forest, grieving for her. After the dream, the king asked the priest, 'What is the meaning of this dream?' The priest replied, 'Today, the deceitful Ravana has carried off Sita, and your lord Rama is wandering in the forest, searching for her, filled with sorrow.' This news must be sent to you quickly, through the mouth of the messenger. This is what the priest told the king, and I have come here according to his orders." Saying this, the messenger placed a box containing a letter before Rama. Rama picked it up, placing it on his head, and opened it, reading the letter aloud. || 247-252 ||
It said, "From this prosperous city of Ayodhya, the lord of the prosperous, King Dasharatha, with his arms outstretched in love, embraces his beloved sons and inquires after their well-being. He commands that you proceed from here towards the south...
1. Ath Ka, Kha, Ga.

Page #324:
---------------------------
266
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, after the Pariṣvajya, Anu-yu-jya, Anga, Kṣema, and Vata, it is declared that:
254
Those who reside within the Dakṣiṇābdhi (Southern Ocean)
255
And the fifty-four great islands, followers of the Cakravartin,
256
And Keśava, by his own greatness, protects them.
257
Among these islands, there is one called Lanka, adorned with the Trikūṭa mountain.
258
In it, after the four generations of the descendants of Vinamika, the Vidyadhara kings,
259
Who were always eager to protect their subjects, passed away,
260
There arose a wicked king named Rāvaṇa, a thorn in the side of the world, a libertine among women.
261
Then, one day, Nārada, desiring war,
262
Described to him the beauty, grace, and radiance of Sītā.
263
At that very moment, Rāvaṇa's mind was pierced by the irresistible arrows of Kāmadeva.
264
His intelligence and fortitude were shattered. He was a magician, far removed from the path of righteousness.
265
"Coming secretly, by some means, I have brought Sītā, the queen, to my city.
266
I will not return until the time for our efforts arrives.
267
Until then, I must protect my own body," he said to his beloved Sītā.
268
"Let the prince send his own best messenger," he said, calming her.
269
Understanding the meaning of his father's letter, Rama's grief subsided, but he was filled with anger.
270
He said, "Does Rāvaṇa wish to ascend to the lap of Yama?"
271
"What chance does a rabbit have against a lion's cub?
272
It is true that when death approaches, one's intelligence is quickly destroyed."
273
Thus, with words filled with anger, Rama expressed his rage.
274
Then, Lakshmana, Janaka, Bharata, and Śatrughna, hearing the news,
275
Approached Rama, greeted him with respect, and, seeing his wise counsel,
276
With words, they sought to alleviate his grief. They said,
277
"Rāvaṇa, by stealing another's wife, has brought disgrace upon himself.
278
He is a traitor, a wicked man, and a follower of unrighteousness.
279
Since he has done this evil deed without thought, he deserves to be burned by Sītā's curse.
280
The sins of those who commit great sins bear fruit in this very life.
281
Let us think of some way to bring Sītā back."
282
Thus, persuaded by them, Rama became alert, as if he had awakened from sleep.

Page #325:
---------------------------
The Eight-Sixty Festival
267
At that time, the doorkeeper informed the two Vidyadharas. The king, following the custom, invited them in. 219
The promising Balabhadra Ramachandra, also delighted by their presence, asked, "From where have you two Kumaras come, and who are you?" 27
In response, Sugriva said, "In the southern range of Vijayardha mountain, there is a city called Kilkila. In the Vidyadharas, there is a very famous Vidyadhara named Balindra, who is the lord of that city. He had a wife named Priyangasundari. They had two sons, Bali and Sugriva. When their father passed away, the elder brother Bali inherited the kingdom, and I received the position of Yuvaraja in due course. After some time, my elder brother Bali's heart was consumed by greed, and he expelled me from the country after seizing my position. This is my introduction. Now, let me introduce my companion. He is also the son of Prabhanjan Vidyadhara, the lord of the city of Vidyutkanta in the southern range. His name is Amittej, and he is a son of Anjana Devi. He possesses immense power and is knowledgeable in all three types of Vidya." 270-276
Once, in a gathering of Vidyadhara Kumaras, they decided to test the greatness of their respective Vidya. At that time, he placed his right foot on the peak of Vijayardha mountain and kicked the chariot of the sun with his left foot. Then, in that very moment, he made his small body the size of a speck of dust. Seeing this, the minds of the Vidyadharas were filled with wonder. At that time, all the Vidyadharas, with great joy, named him 'Anuman'. He has drunk the ocean of Vikriya, meaning he is capable of performing all kinds of Vikriya. He is my dearest friend, even more precious than my life. 277-280
I once went with him to the Sammed Shikhar mountain. There, in the holy place called Siddhakut, I worshipped and paid homage to many statues of Arhant Bhagwan. I sat there with good intentions. At that time, Narada arrived there in his chariot. He was wearing a crown of matted hair, a garland of pearls, and saffron robes. He had a water pot hanging from his side, a parasol in his hand, and was a lifelong celibate, always absorbed in fierce meditation. 281-284

Page #326:
---------------------------
268
- The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana begins with a hymn to the Jinas.  Approaching them, he asked, "O Muni, will I ever attain my position?"  285 ||  "That will not happen," he said, "for the sovereignty of half of Bharata will soon be revealed to Rama and Lakshmana."  28 ||  "If you act as their messenger, your desire will be fulfilled by them.  The reason for sending a messenger is that Rama's wife was wandering in the forest, and Ravana abducted her by deceit.  Therefore, Rama and Lakshmana are now searching for a man worthy of being sent to Lanka to accomplish their purpose.  Thus, O Deva, we have come to you with great joy, having heard Narada's words."  287-289 ||  Hearing these words of the two Vidyadharas, Rama and Lakshmana honored them appropriately.  Then the son of Prabhanjana, Anuman (Hanuman), prayed, "If it is your will, I will search for the location of Sita Devi.  O King, to gain her trust, tell me a sign."  290-291 ||  Hearing this, Ramachandra was convinced that, with this Vidyadhara, whose lineage is like the moon in the sky, our purpose will undoubtedly be fulfilled.  292 ||  Thinking thus, the king gave him a ring marked with his name, clearly stating the color, etc., for her.  293 ||  Bowing to the lotus feet of Ramachandra, he soared into the sky, crossed the ocean and the Trikuta mountain, and reached the city of Lanka.  294 ||  The city of Lanka was twelve yojanas long and nine yojanas wide, with thirty-two gates, surrounded by a rampart, as high as Mount Meru, adorned with the palaces of Ravana, and beautiful with the sounds of bees and cuckoos, and with flowers and leaves, and with gardens that seemed to sing with joy and laughter.  295-297 ||  Reaching the city of Lanka, Anuman, eager to find Sita, took the form of a bee and gradually approached Ravana's assembly hall, observing the princes, Indrajeet and others, and the women, Mandodari and others, with great respect.  298-299 ||  He saw the throne in the middle, like that of Indra, with a lion's strength, adorned with garlands of the crowns of all the kings of the birds, and Ravana sitting there.  300 ||

Page #327:
---------------------------
## The Ashtapashta Parva (Chapter 269)

Hanuman, seeing Ravana, who was like a blue mountain adorned with the waves of the Ganga, with his victorious banners flying, and who had made all his enemies weep, thought: "Oh, what a strange consequence of this sinner's deeds! Driven by his desire for another man's wife, he has violated Dharma."

"Indeed, Narada had said that he would die an untimely death. Thinking this, Hanuman did not see Sita in Ravana's assembly."

"The sun's rays grew dim, the day was declining, and the sun, as if giving Ravana a message, was setting in the west. He thought: 'Those who are helpers in the world usually help those who are wealthy. And all beings in the world rise and fall according to a fixed order.'"

"Thinking thus, the messenger of Rama, Hanuman, climbed the western gate of the inner palace and saw the forest called Nandana. It was like the Nandana forest, adorned with the sounds of bees, with the beauty of all seasons, with beautiful trees laden with fruits and flowers, with fragrant pollen of various flowers carried by the gentle breeze, with artificial mountains, lakes, wells, and arbors adorned with creepers, and with other places that aroused desire. Seeing all this, Hanuman stood there for a while, filled with joy and curiosity."

"There, in a nearby place, he saw Sita. She was surrounded by many Vidyaadharis who were skilled in various arts and who were trying to subdue her. She was sitting under a Shimshapa tree, overwhelmed with grief, meditating silently, striving to protect her family even in death or old age, and she seemed like a garland of chastity and virtue. Seeing her, Hanuman thought: 'This is the same Sita whom Ravana has abducted.' He recognized her by the signs given by King Rama and thought: 'It is because of my good fortune that I have been blessed with the sight of this virtuous woman.' He was filled with love at the sight of her. He thought: 'Just as a creeper is scorched by fire, so this virtuous woman has been scorched by the wicked Ravana.' Though his heart was filled with grief, he was wise in the ways of Dharma."

Page #328:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said by wise men that anger is a vice and an obstacle to the completion of one's work for a discerning person who is engaged in the completion of his initiated work. Therefore, anger is not appropriate in any situation.  

Having realized this, he [Rama] patiently waited for an opportunity to inform Sita of his arrival. At that time, the moon rose and shone like a jewel on the peak of the rising sun. 

After seven days had passed since Sita was brought there, Ravana thought, "I should see how she is doing."  Surrounded by many lamps, he arrived. He appeared like a moving blue mountain adorned with radiant Kalpa trees. He was anxious and accompanied by the women of his inner palace. 

Thinking, "When will I hear news of my husband's well-being?" Sita sat silently, her face unmoving. Ravana watched her for a long time in astonishment.  Thinking, "There is no other woman like her in terms of devotion to her husband," he stepped back a little and stood at a distance. 

From there, he sent his wise messenger, Manjarika, to understand Sita's intentions. Approaching Sita with humility, the messenger said, "O Queen, the king of the Vidyadharas, Ravana, has five thousand wives, all daughters of Vidyadhara kings and as beautiful as you. You are the mistress of them all, holding the position of Mahadevi.  Live happily with the lord of the three worlds, Ravana, on his chest for a long time."

Do not waste your youthful energy like lightning. Consider this thought, "Rama will bring you back from Ravana's clutches," as futile as a vast forest of Kadamba trees.  Who is capable of rescuing a deer trapped in the mouth of a hungry lion?

Hearing this, Sita remained as steadfast as the earth.  Indeed, who can break a devoted wife? Seeing her unwavering, Ravana himself approached fearfully and said, "If you are determined to protect your lineage, then this is not a matter to be considered. If you are ashamed of being associated with a lowly man, then your offspring will not be born here."

Page #329:
---------------------------
## The Ashtashatam Parva, Chapter 301

**330.** If you have love for Rama, then consider him as dead. Why do you forget him now, whom you have known for so long?

**331.** If this is your argument, then in this world, who is not acquainted with whom? Perhaps you think that Rama will come here and take me away. But that is not possible, because the ocean is a chasm here, the Trikuta mountain is a fortress, the Vidyadharas are the guardians, Lanka is the city, and Meghnad and other warriors are here. I am their lord. How can your Rama enter here?

**332.** Therefore, my dear, abandon your hope in Rama and fulfill my desire. What is the use of wasting time in a task that is bound to be accomplished?

**333.** Whether you laugh or cry, I am your guest. My dear, you are like a jewel in the crown of my beautiful women.

**334.** If you, due to your misfortune, do not heed my words, then you will have to become my concubine today, or else become a guest of Yama's abode.

**335.** Just as a wicked man talks nonsense to subdue Lakshmi, similarly, Ravana spoke nonsense to subdue Sita.

**336.** Hearing this, Sita, with a steady mind, became as pure as Dharma-meditation, remaining steadfast. The stream of words, like a blazing fire, emanating from Ravana's mouth, was extinguished immediately upon reaching the ocean of Sita's fortitude.

**337.** At that time, Ravana thought, "Just as I conquer all men through my valor, similarly, I conquer all women through my fortune, bringing them under my control. Yet, this Sita is scorning me." Thinking this, Ravana became enraged.

**338.** The fierce fire of anger, which was spreading in the battlefield of Ravana's mind, to quickly burn the creeper-like Sita, was pacified by Mandodari with the nectar of her beneficial and soothing words.

**339.** She said, "Why are you getting angry in this inappropriate place, like an ordinary man? Think for a moment, does this woman seem worthy of your punishment? Oh, is a garland made of Mandara flowers worthy of being thrown away? Remember, by scorning virtuous women, the celestial beings and other knowledge will surely be destroyed, and you will become like a bird without wings."

**340.** Earlier, Ashvagriva, the king of birds, was known for his brilliance.

**341.** Madhusudana became famous because of Padmavati.

**342.** In short, the rule for a carpenter is to announce the arrival of Saturn.

**343.** Therefore, her birth cannot happen here.

Page #330:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

"Do not become like Ashanighosh, who has been defeated. Do not think that I am saying this out of fear of being a co-wife. Accept my words as proof and abandon your attachment to Sita." Thus spoke Mandodari to Ravana. Ravana was unable to answer her words and, filled with anger, returned to the city, saying, "She can only be abandoned with her life."

Meanwhile, Mandodari, consumed by grief for her abandoned daughter, said to Sita in private, "My mind believes that you, my daughter, have come here to cause strife. You were buried in the earth by the order of the knower of destiny. Blessed one, you have been brought here by the wicked fate."

"It is true that the will of fate is rarely violated in this world. I do not know if you are related to me in this birth or in a previous birth. I do not know why my love for you is growing today when I see you. O lotus-eyed one, it is possible that I am your mother and you are my daughter, and you understand this too. But the king of the Vidyadharas wants to make you my co-wife. Therefore, my child, even if you have to face death, do not fulfill his desire, do not act according to his wishes."

Thus speaking, Mandodari became very eager. Milk filled her breasts, and her breasts seemed to bend down to anoint Sita. Her throat choked, tears of affection flowed from her eyes, and her lotus-like face was stained with the soot of grief.

Seeing all this, Sita felt as if she had come to her mother. Her heart became soft and her eyes filled with tears.

Knowing her intention, Mandodari, the best of Ravana's wives, said, "Mother, if you wish to accomplish your task well, I beg you with folded hands, take food. The body is the means of everything, and food is the means of the body."

Wise men say, "Where there is no tree, there will be no flowers." Similarly, while the body remains, you will be able to see your lord Ramachandra. If his vision is not attainable, then perform great penance with this body. If you do not accept my words, then I myself will be your food.

Page #331:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter of the Sixty-Fourth Book

**303**

She said, "I will fast," and having thus resolved, she thought, "My mother, though not my birth mother, is grieving for me as if I were her own." **36**

She bowed low and looked at her with affection, as if her own daughter were looking at her at the time of her installation. **361**

"This sweet sight of this virtuous woman is burning me from all sides," thought Mandodari, consumed by grief. **362**

Overwhelmed with sorrow, she entered the city, humbled by her grief. Then, from the Sisipā tree, the messenger, Hanuman, came, assuming the form of a monkey by the power of the Plavaga Vidya. **363**

He put the guards of the forest to sleep with his magic and stood before Sita. **364**

Bowing to her, the monkey narrated his entire story and said, "By the order of my master, Lord Rama, I have brought this casket containing a letter." **365**

He placed the casket before her. Seeing the monkey, Sita doubted, "Is this the wicked Ravana, assuming a magical form?" **366**

As she was thus doubtful, her eyes fell upon the ring adorned with the Srivatsa mark and engraved with the letters of her husband's name. **367**

"This too seems like his magic," she thought. "Who knows? Perhaps this letter is also his." **368**

She broke the seal, recognizing it as the great king's, and read the letter. After reading it, her grief vanished, and she looked at him with affection. **369**

"You have kept me alive," she said. "Therefore, you are in the place of my father, you are like my father." **370**

Hanuman, covering his ears, replied, "Mother, you are the great queen of my master. Do not entertain any other thoughts. Though I have the power to take you today, I do not have my master's order. King Rama will come himself, kill Ravana, and take you with him, along with his wealth. His courage will spread his fame throughout the three worlds." **371-372**

"Therefore, eat something to sustain your body," he said. **373**

Page #332:
---------------------------
304
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, the messenger Anuman said to Sita, "O Queen, what is the fault in taking food? Your meeting with King Ramachandra will happen soon." When Anuman said this, Sita, abandoning her sadness, agreed to take food for the sake of her body's well-being. Being skilled in speaking about the appropriate actions for the time, Sita quickly dismissed the messenger. 374-375. The messenger Anuman, bowing to Sita's lotus feet, departed at sunrise and quickly reached Ramachandra, who was waiting for his arrival. 376. Upon reaching, he first informed Ramachandra of the success of his mission with a smile on his face, then bowed to him. Lord Ramachandra embraced him warmly and asked him to sit down. When he sat down with joy, Ramachandra asked him, "Why have you seen my beloved?" In response, Anuman spoke to Ramachandra with excellent words that would bring him joy. He said, "Ravana is arrogant by nature, and his Chakra Ratna has also appeared. Besides this, there are many bad omens in Lanka, and his Vidhyadhar servants are very skilled. Considering all these things carefully with the ministers, you should quickly decide on a way to bring Sita back, as it is possible." Thus, Anuman informed him of this appropriate action. Ramachandra, who had a strong resolve, carefully considered Anuman's words in his heart. At that time, he tied the belt of the commander-in-chief on Anuman and made Sugriva the crown prince. 377-382. After that, he asked the ministers to decide on the action to be taken with both of them. In response, Angad said, "O Lord! Kings are of three types: 1. Lobha-Vijay, 2. Dharma-Vijay, and 3. Asura-Vijay. Wise men who know about politics, to achieve their goals, suggest that for the first type, one should give charity, for the second type, one should behave peacefully, and for the third type, one should use deception and punishment. Among these three types of kings, Ravana is the last type - Asura-Vijay. He is a low-born person who does evil deeds, so wise men should use deception and punishment against him. Although they should use these methods, they should not be careless about the order. First, one should try to use peace with him." 383-386. If you want to decide who knows this peace,

Page #333:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter

305

But none of them possess the ability to travel through the sky. Therefore, the new commander you have appointed should be sent. || 388 ||

This path is not to be abandoned, it is a proven success, and is supported by scriptures. One who is well-versed in knowledge of lineage and other disciplines should be entrusted with the decision of this task. || 389 ||

With this advice, Ramachandra, with the help of Mano-vega, Vijay, Kumuda, and the auspicious Ravi-Gati, praised Anuman, saying, "O Kumar! There is no one else here who knows the task and can accomplish it, except you." || 390 ||

Ramachandra also told Anuman, "First, you should tell Vibhishan that in this Lanka, you are the knower of Dharma, a wise man, and one who understands the consequences of actions." || 391 ||

"It is for the benefit of both the Lord of Lanka, Ravana, and the chief of the Surya-vansha, Ramachandra. The abduction of Sita is unjust, will bring eternal disgrace, and is harmful. Therefore, by informing Ravana, who is infatuated with lust, of this, you should free Sita. By doing so, you will protect your lineage from sin, destruction, and reproach." || 392-393 ||

"If Vibhishan submits to these arguments, then consider the enemy subdued." || 394 ||

"O best of messengers! Along with Lakshmi, consider Sita also to be with you. Decide on any other tasks that need to be done, and the news of the enemy, and return to me quickly." || 395-396 ||

Saying this, Ramachandra sent Anuman off with his assistants. Anuman, bowing to Ramachandra, went to Lanka and, after learning everything, met Vibhishan. || 397 ||

"I have been sent by King Ramachandra to you." Saying this, he respectfully conveyed everything that Ramachandra had said to Vibhishan. || 398 ||

"O Lord of the birds! You are the bearer of my master's message and a well-wisher. Please take me to Ravana. The success of Ramachandra's desired task will be achieved through you. If this happens, this task will be accomplished through you." || 399-400 ||

"Even if you tell him, if that foolish one does not release Sita, then his sin will not be yours. Your virtue will be self-evident." || 401 ||

Who should be sent there? The answer is that although there are many earthly kings with qualities like skill and cleverness, none of them possess the ability to travel through the sky. Therefore, the new commander you have appointed should be sent. || 387-388 ||

This path is not to be abandoned, it is a proven success, and is supported by scriptures. One who is well-versed in knowledge of lineage and other disciplines should be entrusted with the decision of this task. || 389 ||

Page #334:
---------------------------
306
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Seeing the increasing prosperity of Vardhamana, Rama, inspired by his punya, said, "We should go to the shelter of Ramachandra, who is the well-wisher of both the worlds."  || 402 || Thus, inspired by the spirit of battle, a force of fifty crore eighty-four lakh land-based soldiers and three and a half crore celestial beings joined him.  || 403 || "With this force, Ramachandra and Lakshmana will reach here. Although they are capable of taking away the wealth of Ravana, the king of the celestial beings, who is like Sita, they have natural affection for you. That is why they sent me. Don't you know this?"  || 404 || Hearing these words of Anumana, Vibhishana, who was eager to do his duty, immediately took him to Ravana and said, "O Deva, Ramachandra has sent this messenger to you."  || 405-407 || Anumana, who was wise and spoke clearly and sweetly, bowed to Ravana, offered him a suitable gift, and then sat on the seat designated by Ravana. He then began to speak in words that were worthy of being heard, saying, "O Deva, listen."  || 408-409 || "Ramachandra, who is increasing in his own power, whose wisdom and courage are conducive to all, whose virtues are his ornaments, and who is skilled in all arts, is currently residing in Ayodhya. He has sent this message to you, the lord of the three worlds. He first inquired about your well-being and then said, 'You have taken Sita, thinking she belongs to someone else. But she is mine. You have taken her without knowing. Therefore, nothing has gone wrong. You are wise, so send her back quickly.'  || 410-412 || "If you do not send Sita back, this strange act of yours, who is a gem of the Vinami dynasty and a great soul, will be detrimental to dharma and happiness."  || 413 || "It is not proper for the great ocean of a noble son to bear this stain. Therefore, you should throw it out with the big waves of releasing Sita."  || 414 || Hearing these words of Anumana, Ravana replied, "I did not take Sita without knowing, but knowing. I am a king, therefore all treasures are mine, and especially the treasure of women is mine. Your king 
1 Saardhatritayasankhya Lo. 2 Swaan Kha, Ga, Gha. 3 Aatmaabhigamikpraasotsahach gunaabhooshanaha Kha, Ga, Gha. Aatmaabhigamikprajnasahasagunaabhooshanaha Lo. 4 Kulputramivambhoche-Lo. 5 Bhoobujamma Kha, Gha, Ma.

Page #335:
---------------------------
## The Ashta-Shat-Parva (Chapter 307)

**416.** "Is it appropriate for you, O King, to say that you will send Sita? All the jewels are mine, but Sita is especially mine."

**417.** "If he wants to take Sita, let him defeat me in battle. This is what fate has ordained, a message of Ravana's destruction."

**418.** Hearing this auspicious omen, a sign of Ramachandra's rise, the son of the wind (Ravana) thought, "This is not what I want."

**419.** The wicked and evil-minded Ravana spoke, "You are the one who stops injustice. If you have to stop the one who stops injustice, who can stop him, like a fire in the ocean?"

**420.** "I am known to be impenetrable, and Ramachandra is famous for his lion-like strength."

**421.** "It is fitting for you to consider that your infamy will last as long as the moon, if you do this. I have spoken to you in the spirit of brotherhood."

**422.** Hearing the messenger's words, Paulastya (Ravana) replied, "This jewel (Sita) was given to Ramachandra by Janaka without informing me. I took her out of anger."

**423.** "If my infamy arises from accepting something that is rightfully mine, so be it. Ramachandra even wants to take the Chakra-ratna from my hand."

**424.** Thus, the messenger spoke to the ten-headed Ravana, his words pleasant and deep, in accordance with the situation.

**425.** "Why do you say that you have taken Sita? Everyone knows..."

Page #336:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is known to all that Sita was abducted.  Who held her in their hands at the time of her abduction? You did not conquer Sita, but stole her. Therefore, tell me, does this action reveal your bravery? Or is this just empty talk?  You should quickly return Queen Sita with sweet words.  

Thus, the lord of the Pushpaka Vimana, whose heart was burning with the fire of scorn born from inference, said, "Ramachandra, he who desires to seize the gem of the venomous serpent's hood desires to meet his end. You are a messenger, therefore you are not worthy of death. So leave, leave!" Thus, Ravana challenged Anumana with the roar that conquered the lion.  

Then, warriors like Kumbha, Nikumbha, and the cruel Kumbhakarna, along with Indrajit, Indracharma, Atikanyarka, Kharadushana, Khar, Durmukha, Mahamuka, and other Vidhyadharas, and other angry Kumaras, all challenged Anumana. Then Anumana said, "What is the benefit of this useless roar in front of women? What task is accomplished by it? You should hear my answer in battle."  

Hearing this, Vibhishana, the knower of the ways of justice, stopped those angry Vidhyadharas and said, "It is not right to speak such harsh words." Vibhishana also said to Anumana, "O noble one, go home. No one can stop this Ravana, who has been abandoned by men due to his evil deeds. He will not listen to anyone."  

Indeed, who can stop the rise of future good and bad deeds? Thus spoke Vibhishana. Then Anumana went to Sita, who had given up food and water.  

Seeing that Sita had eaten a little due to Mandodari's insistence, Anumana quickly crossed the sea and went to Ramachandra.  

He bowed and said, "What is the use of saying much? The essence is that Ravana will not release Sita. Therefore, you should act accordingly. Do not delay, because wise men praise those who act quickly in a decided matter. A decided task should be completed quickly."  

Hearing Anumana's words, Ramachandra, the lion of the Ikshvaku dynasty, went to the forest called Chitrakuta with his four-armed army. Although he wanted to quickly go to Lanka, he was delayed by the time.

Page #337:
---------------------------
## Chapter Eighty-Six
### 306

The messenger of Vali, observing Raghunandan, bowed down and offered gifts, speaking to him without deception. "My master, the powerful Vali, requests you, O King, to make me your messenger. Do not accept Sugriva and Angada as messengers, for they are capable of little work. If you wish to see my prowess, remain here. I alone will go to Lanka, disgrace Ravana, and bring back Janaki today."

Hearing these words, Rama, the elder brother of Lakshmana, who knew the art of diplomacy, asked his ministers, "What should be the reply to the King of Kishkindha?"

Angada, the most beloved and praised by all the ministers, said, "Kings are of three types: enemies, friends, and neutrals. Ravana is our enemy, and Vali is the enemy of our friend. If we do not act according to his words, he will make an alliance with the enemy, joining forces with him. This will strengthen the enemy, making his destruction difficult. If we heed Vali's words, this task will be difficult for you. Therefore, it is necessary to destroy the King of Kishkindha first. After that, with increased power and wealth, the destruction of Ravana will be easy."

Accepting Angada's words, Rama called the messenger and said, "Give me the great elephant named Mahamegha, and accompany me to Lanka. Later, we will discuss your desired work." Saying this, he dismissed Vali's messenger and sent his own messenger as well.

Going to Vali, the elder brother of Sugriva, they delivered Rama's message, greatly angering him. Filled with pride, Vali said, "Rama, who attacks me in this way, has spread his fame in all directions by destroying Ravana, the abductor of women, and bringing back Sita. What glory is there in this?"

Page #338:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

310
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, in the Dasasyam, the Sama, the Samoktya, the Samipssau, the Samavayika.  The harsh words spoken by this one, see the intelligence and valor of this one. || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "For Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and valor of this one." || 453 || Hearing this abusive language, the messenger of Ramachandra said, "Ravana, who stole another's wife, you sent words of peace, but for me, who wants to be with you, you speak harsh words. See the intelligence and

Page #339:
---------------------------
Ash, Parva

When autumn arrived in Kishkindha, the army of the earth-dwellers, led by Vibhormanahero, numbered fourteen Akshauhinis.  [467]  At that time, Lakshmana, having fasted on the mountain Jagatpada, performed worship at the place of liberation known as Shivaghosha, along with me. [468]  He achieved the perfection of the Prashtapti Vidya, protected by one hundred and eight warriors.  [469]  Similarly, Sugreeva, observing a great fast and vow, worshipped the Mahavidyas on the Siddhashila, a sacred rock on the mountain Sammeda.  [470]  Likewise, other celestial beings performed worship of their respective vidyas.  [470]  Thus, the army of the lord of the aerial beings, with its banners fluttering, led by Rama, Lakshmana, Sugreeva, and Anuman, [471]  filled with elephants like crocodiles, horses like waves, and resembling a sea of destruction, marched towards Lanka.  [472]

Upon Anuman's return from Lanka, Kumbhakarna and his brothers said to Ravana, "O Lord, you are like the sun, illuminating our noble lineage, and your valor is renowned everywhere.  Therefore, it is not fitting for you to do this deed.  This jewel of a woman is a leftover, so please relinquish her at our request."  [473-474]  Thus they spoke, but Ravana, being attached to Sita, could not abandon her.  He retorted, "Ramachandra is a mere grass-man, as insignificant as a blade of grass.  His army is coming here to take Sita, and these words are being heard.  Therefore, how can Sita be released?  It would be a stain on our lineage."  [475-476]

Vibhishana, Ravana's younger brother, could not bear to hear these words.  He said, "You call Ramachandra a grass-man, but you do not know the valor of the Suryavanshi Ramachandra.  You are blinded by lust, and therefore you do not listen to the words of your brothers.  You are pointing out the fault of surrendering another man's wife, so it seems you are the best among those who know faults."  [477-478]  "Taking another man's wife is valor?  This practice is beginning with you in the world.  What will your false pronouncements lead to but the creation of fear in both worlds and the emergence of a difficult, wrong path, and the abandonment of the right path?"  [479-480]

Page #340:
---------------------------
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana

What is the point of desiring forbidden objects when you are in a state of renunciation? Know that this Vidyaadhari Lakshmi is dear to your virtues. If you do not return Sita, she will abandon you today, considering you to be devoid of virtues. Why do you make yourself the leader of the inactive by desiring another woman? You are becoming unfavorable to punya by accumulating sin through this wicked tendency. Without favorable destiny, how can you attain wealth? Stealing another woman is a sin that is difficult to overcome among all sins.

What is the point of saying more? This sin will take you to the seventh hell. Or let it be, this sin will cause suffering in the future, but women who are repositories of virtue are capable of destroying the lineage of those who are angry with them by cursing them in this very life. You had vowed that you would not desire a woman who did not desire you. Why are you destroying this vow, which is like a ship to cross the ocean of existence? Noble men should buy fame with their lives, but you are so ignorant that you are buying sin and disgrace that will last for another kalpa by giving up your life and fame. Therefore, shame on you. Do you not know whose daughter Sita is? It is true that for those whose minds are intoxicated by lust, even known things are like unknown things. Do you not know that there is desire for these objects of the senses until they are obtained, satisfaction when they are obtained, and boredom when they are enjoyed? Therefore, do not have vain love for another woman who is unworthy, orphaned, a cause of destruction, and an accumulator of sin and suffering. You should also remember what kind of order was given by those who know the future, those who know the signs.

Consider the result of the arising of the wheel. Those who know the Puranas call Rama the eighth Balabhadra and Lakshmana the ninth Narayana. O wise one! Consider this too. There is no fault in handing her over to Rama, just as there is fault in not handing her over.

Therefore, considering all these things, hand over Sita to Rama. This is the means of increasing Lakshmi and wealth, and it is Dharma and virtue.

Page #341:
---------------------------
## The Ashtastama Parva

The wise Vibhishana, desiring to make his fame as bright as the moon, spoke these words to the fearsome Ravana.  "You, enraged, accused me of treachery in the assembly, and publicly humiliated me.  Even now, you insult me, using your power as a brother.  You are not worthy of killing me, so leave my land," Ravana said harshly.

Vibhishana thought, "This wicked man's destruction is inevitable.  My destruction along with him will only bring me shame."  "You have banished me from my land, but it is for the best.  It is said, 'The clouds rain in the forest.'  This proverb has come true for me today, thanks to my good fortune.  Now, I will go to the lotus feet of Ramachandra."  Vibhishana thought this in his heart and made his decision.

He quickly crossed the ocean, like a gesture of courtesy, and reached Ramachandra, just as the flow of a great river reaches the sea.  Ramachandra sent Lakshmana and other great warriors, who were skilled in the art of waves, to welcome Vibhishana.  They brought him back, after testing and gaining his trust.  Vibhishana, understanding Ramachandra's influence, became one with him.  After traveling a few stages, Ramachandra's army reached the shore of the ocean and settled down.  At that time, Shrutaman spoke to Ramachandra, "O Lord, if you command, I will go to Lanka, to display my valor.  I will destroy the forest and break the pride of your enemy."

"I will also burn Lanka and set fire to the enemy's body.  If he comes here, driven by his pride, he will be easily destroyed, having lost his place.  Even if he doesn't come, his pride will surely be broken."  Hearing this request, King Ramachandra granted permission and appointed many valiant Vidyadharas to assist him.  Shrutaman, pleased with Ramachandra's command, quickly created a fearsome army of Vanaras using his Vanara-vidya.  He then crossed the ocean with his army, swiftly overtaking the forest guards.

Page #342:
---------------------------
314
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Having seized and subdued the forest guards, he destroyed the forest in anger. The forest guards, with their arms raised high, cried out in a terrible voice. They entered the city, proclaiming the unheard. At that time, the city was marked by a multitude of flags fluttering with the power of Rakshasa Vidya. The protectors of the city, sensing the battle, approached the son of the wind. Then, the son of the wind commanded the leaders of the monkey army. They, rising up, attacked the forest trees. Then, he, with his blazing Mahajvala Vidya, burned the city from outside. The mighty one, having destroyed and thrown away the rough army of Rakshasas, thus uprooted the mighty tree of Ravana's insurmountable prowess. Having uprooted the monkey army leaders, Ramachandra stood ready, his army facing the battle. Ravana, the serpent, asked Vibhishana, "Why has he not come?" Vibhishana replied, "Ravana is not in Lanka at this time. Having heard of the passing of the girl, and the pride of Sugriva and Hanuman in their Vidya-bala, he has appointed his son, Indrajit, for his protection. He has undertaken an eight-day fast, and with his senses well controlled, he is seated on the mountain of Aditya-pada, perfecting his Vidya. When he becomes proficient in the Mahavidya of the Rakshasas, he will become very powerful. Therefore, our task now is to obstruct his Vidya-siddhi and besiege Lanka." Thus spoke Vibhishana to Ramachandra. Then, Sugriva and Hanuman, having mastered their own Vidya, gave Ramachandra and Lakshmana four Vidya separately: Garuda-vahani, Simha-vahani, Bandha-mochani, and Hanana-avaran. Then, the two brothers, with their many Vimanas created by the Vidya called Prajnapti, took their vast army and stationed it outside the city of Lanka. At that time, many Vidya-dhara Kumaras, by the command of Ramachandra, went to the mountain of Aditya-pada and began to cause trouble. Then, Indrajit, the eldest son of Ravana, filled with anger, sent the Vidya-deva kings and all the previously perfected Devas with the command, "Fight them all!" Hearing Indrajit's words, the Vidya-devas said, "We have already fought with you, and we have been defeated. Now, we will not fight with you."

Page #343:
---------------------------
## The Ashta-Shat-Parva

315 celestial chiefs and all the gods from the east, 
"We have served you for this long time due to your virtuous power. 
But now your virtue has been exhausted, so we are unable to do what you ask." 
[525]

"You have accomplished your desired task due to your accumulated virtue. 
But now your virtue is exhausted, so we are unable to do what you ask." 
[526]

"You are all powerful, what can be achieved by you? 
I will kill these human-like deer and the celestial beings with my own strength." 
[527]

"A task accomplished by helpers brings shame to the proud." 
Thus, enraged, Ravana entered the city with Indrajit. 
[528]

"The past and future of a wicked person with depleted virtue are destroyed." 
Upon entering the city, he learned from his family that the enemies had surrounded Lanka. 
[529]

"Look at the irony of time, the deer have surrounded the lion. 
Or perhaps, when death approaches, one's nature becomes confused." 
[530]

Roaring like a lion attacking a tall elephant, Ravana commanded his general, Ravikīrti, who bore the deer flag: 
[531]

"Sound the war drums to destroy the enemy." 
He was commanded, and thus he did, gathering all his forces. 
[532]

In the end, the messenger of death, like a sudden storm, brought together all his forces. 
Then, dividing his forces, Ravana left Lanka. 
[533]

He was surrounded by Sukumbha, Nikumbha, Kumbhakarna, and other brothers, with Indrajit at their head, along with Indrakīrti, Indravamā, and other princes. 
[534]

He was also surrounded by the mighty Mahamuha, Atikāya, Durmukha, Khara, Dūshaṇa, and Dhūma, the chief celestial beings. 
[535]

He appeared like the summer sun surrounded by cruel planets, and he mocked the play of Yama, the god of death, who was eager to devour the three worlds. 
[536]

"Rama and Lakshmana are not capable of standing before me. 
Even if many rabbits and jackals gather, can they stand before a lion? 
Even if this world is devoid of Ravana while they are alive, I will never protect this earth with them." 
[537-538]

Thus, Ravana, with his unreasoning arrogance, spoke to his assembled forces. 
[539]

Page #344:
---------------------------
316
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
He was seated on the back of the great elephant, Kaalamegha, who was intoxicated with pride. His banner, the flag of the Rakshasas, was fluttering in the face of the wind. His radiant wheel was shining in front of him, and his umbrella was blocking the sun. He had deafened the ears of the elephants with the sound of his many drums.  He was ready for battle, filled with pride, and on this side, Rama was filled with anger when he heard of his arrival. 
He was unstoppable, burning his enemies with the fire of his anger. The flames of his gaze, like arrows, were shooting out from his eyes. He was throwing them in all directions, like burning coals, ready for battle. He was blessed with the fifth limb of the army, the group of Mahavidyas. His banner was a palm tree, and he was riding on the elephant, Anjan Parvat. Lakshmana, whose banner was a Garuda holding a snake in its beak, was riding on the elephant, Vijay Parvat. They both first bowed to the Jineshwar, the destroyer of all obstacles, and then, surrounded by Sugriva, Anuman, and other Vidyadharas, they set out to destroy the darkness of their enemies, like the sun and the moon. 
They were both shining like stars, and they were the destroyers of the arrogant and the foolish. They had divided their army to face Ravana, and they stood in the battlefield, ready to fight. The sound of their drums was drowning out the sound of their enemies' drums, and it seemed as if they were entering the caves, forts, and other places, driven by the force of their attack. 
The roar of the elephants and the neighing of the horses were increasing the courage of the warriors. The battle that was about to begin was terrifying the enemies and blocking the sky. They were invincible, like the gods. 
The archers were ready with their bows, and their arrows were like the waves of the ocean, ready to strike. 
534-536. Ravana himself was speaking.

Page #345:
---------------------------
## The Battle of Shraushta

**Verse 554:** Like harsh words piercing the heart from afar, their cries were filled with anger, though they were divine.

**Verse 555:** Their words, like mantras whispered close to the ear, were unwavering even in difficult tasks, like the company of the virtuous.

**Verse 556:** The archers, holding their bows, marched forth, while the valiant warriors, clad in armor and swords, roared with might.

**Verse 557:**  The warriors, eager for victory, thundered like dark clouds, armed with various weapons and skilled in diverse forms of combat.

**Verse 558:**  From all sides, the warriors arrived to fight the enemy, their swift steeds tearing the earth with their hooves.

**Verse 559:**  They were like kings, adorned with fly whisks and seats adorned with precious gems, or like loyal servants, dedicated to their master's welfare.

**Verse 560:**  Their mouths filled with grass, they seemed to be eating, and the sweet sound of their bells announced their victory continuously.

**Verse 561:**  Clad in armor, they seemed to have wings, soaring through the sky, their mouths foaming with saliva, as if worshipping the earth with their dancing feet.

**Verse 562:**  Born in lands like Yavana, Kashmir, and Valhika, they were mounted on steeds, their bodies adorned with the gleaming light of their swords, like waves rising from a vast ocean of warriors.

**Verse 563:**  They emerged to terrify their enemies with their fierce cries, their bodies adorned with weapons and banners, their chariots driven by winds favorable to them.

**Verse 564:**  Like ships on a sea of battle, the chariots surged forward, their wheels churning the earth, two of them as powerful as Ravana with his single wheel.

**Verse 565:**  The chariots, led by their commanders, charged in all directions, their swift steeds fully equipped with weapons, believing that they were more powerful than Ravana with his single wheel.

Page #346:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

Our chariots, fully equipped and with their axles firmly bound, why should they not be ready for battle? Let the foot soldiers, horses, and elephants run ahead, what can they do to these valiant beings? Victory is ours, and with this thought, the chariots, laden with their burden, moved slowly. The righteous, wielding their weapons, the chakravartis with their single wheels, attacked from all directions. What wonder is it that the two-wheeled chariots attacked from all directions?  Like mountains, their foreparts raised high, their tails trailing behind, their trunks raised high, adorned with red tips, resembling lotus ponds. Their conduct was subservient to others, they were like children, and they seemed to be driving away the bees that were buzzing around their ears with the sound of their flapping wings. They resembled black clouds with rows of white herons, their white flags fluttering in the wind. Some of the elephants, smelling the musk of other elephants, were ready to fight with their trunks, which were blooming like lotuses in the sky. They were restrained from fighting by the sharp blows of the ankushas, which had wounded them in their flanks. They shook their heads repeatedly near the group of female elephants, their anger subsided, and they were led by the chieftains.  The elephants, with their towering bodies, seemed to be attacking the entire world. These moving mountains, the elephants, emerged from all sides. The flags, driven by the favorable wind, were moving towards the enemy, as if they were ready to fight, abandoning their staffs. Or, they seemed to be removing the cloud-like dust that had settled on the clear sky. Or, they were holding staffs, that is, they were attached to staffs, and therefore they were imitating the elders, or they were released at the right time, that is, they were unfurled, and therefore they were following the path of the sages. At that time, the dust was rising and spreading everywhere, as if the earth, burdened by the army, was breathing.

Page #347:
---------------------------
Alas, the festival
31
A great fear had arrived, causing the warriors to become confused.  A man who has not accumulated merit in past lives is disliked by all eyes, just as this dust was disliked by all eyes. || 580 ||
This dust, filled with speed, was crossing the sky, spreading throughout the entire sky.  Within that dust, the entire army became as if fainted, or as if in the womb, or as if a motionless picture painted on a wall.  Its entire clamor became silent.  Just as the agitation of a defeated king gradually calms down, so too, when that dust, filled with great agitation, gradually calmed down, and vision became somewhat mobile, the warriors, filled with anger, who were inspired by the commanders, became pure in their movement, like new clouds, holding bows, and began to rain arrows, making the hearts of the enemy warriors devoid of passion.  The warriors, inspired by the commanders, were fighting with great enthusiasm. || 581-585 ||
That is right, because the strength of the virtuous does not manifest from the enemy, but from the friend.  I have received sustenance from the king, to give my life - I have received wages.  Thinking, "Now is the time," a warrior was repaying that debt in the battle.  In fighting, there is the fulfillment of the duty of a servant, the attainment of fame, and the attainment of the path of the brave - these three fruits are obtained. || 586-587 ||
And these three are our aims, thinking this, a warrior was fighting with another warrior.  "I will not see the death of anyone in my army, because that would be my defeat," thinking this, a warrior himself went to fight and died first.  Thus, all the warriors, filled with intense anger, were continuously fighting without any anxiety, with all kinds of weapons, those that could be released with both hands, those that could be released with one hand, and those that could not be released.  The arrows released from both sides, facing each other, were making their way through the middle, and very quickly falling into the other army.  The arrows, sharp and blood-drinking, which were released far away, leaving behind the string, were killing even when they were straight, because the qualities that reside in a wicked man are not called qualities.  The arrows had no enmity with anyone, nor did they receive any fruit, yet they were killing the enemies. || 588-591 ||
That is right, because
1 (kalakalam yatha syat, ka. ti.) kalakalan kanchit kha.
2 phalatrayam kha.
3 aanit-la, ma.
4 param prapatitah la.
5 dure kha.

Page #348:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

The state of such sharp (pointed - cunning) objects whose actions are inspired by others is as follows. Like many Vidyaadhar birds whose mutual enmity is bound, they were killing each other, considering their lives as insignificant as grass, with arrows. 562-564 ||

Many warriors wielding bows, with their sights fixed on the target, were killing many elephants, as large as mountains, with swift, sharp arrows. One warrior killed an elephant with a single, heart-piercing arrow. It is right, for those who desire victory accept those who know the heart of others - they include them in their side. One warrior, unconscious from the wound, covered in blood, was revived by the wind from the wings of the approaching vultures and began to kill many more warriors. One slightly unconscious warrior, seeing himself being carried away by a celestial maiden, laughed with joy and suddenly got up. In the battlefield, filled with arrows, echoing with the sounds of war drums, where headless bodies dance continuously, and where the canopy of arrows is cast, one warrior, whose entire intestines are bound and who is worshipped by the flow of much blood, had attracted the valiant Lakshmi to his side through a Rakshasa marriage. In that battlefield, the Dakinis were dancing with great agility, and the jackals were making terrifying sounds. Those jackals, with their mouths turned upwards, seemed very terrifying with the sparks of fire coming out of them. The group of Rakshasas, whose group of scissors is raised upwards and who are holding trembling skulls, were spitting out a lot of blood that they had drunk. The sun's disc also became devoid of light and radiance at that time due to the falling of very sharp arrows, Naraacha, and Chakra, etc. weapons. Just as the group of false believers, attacked by the Syadvadis, suffers defeat, so at that time, the army of Ravana, attacked by the soldiers of Ramachandra, was suffering defeat. Thus, the battle continued in that battlefield for a long time. 565 - 604 ||

In that battle, many people died, many were wounded, and many sinners, unable to give up their lives, died with their breaths caught in their throats || 605 || At that time, those dying men were raising such doubts that Yama, the god of death, 
g० ।
१ नाना स्वयाः खगैः ल० । २ लक्ष्यानडा ख०, ख०, ब०, ग०, म० । ३ निरन्तरे ख०, ४ प्रचुररुधिरचरणचर्चितः । ५ विभीषणः ज्ञ० ।

Page #349:
---------------------------
## The Battle of the Eighty-Six

**607** Many warriors, their bodies worn and weak, lay scattered across the battlefield, causing even Yama, the god of death, to tremble in fear.

**608** Many valiant and powerful horses, their legs severed, struggled to rise with their own strength.

**609** Elephants, pierced by arrows and nārāchas released by the warriors, stood adorned as if they were mountains covered in ochre and adorned with small bamboo shoots.

**610** Chariots, broken and scattered with their wheels and other parts destroyed, shone like shattered ships amidst the ocean of battle.

**611** Thus, the battle raged for many days between the two armies. One day, seeing his army destroyed due to unfavorable fate, Ravana was filled with sorrow.

**612** At that moment, he severed Sita's head with his magic and, filled with rage, threw it before Rama, saying, "Here, take your goddess."

**613** Seeing Sita's severed head, delusion took hold of Rama's heart, while the army of Ravana celebrated the victory.

**614** Observing this, Vibhīṣaṇa spoke the truth to Rama, "No one except you is capable of even touching the virtuous Sita. This is merely Ravana's magic, O Lord, do not grieve."

**615** Rama, trusting Vibhīṣaṇa's words, swiftly destroyed Ravana's army, just as a lion destroys a herd of elephants or the sun destroys darkness.

**616** Abandoning open warfare, Ravana, with his sons, sought to engage in a battle of illusion, ascending into the sky, the celestial court.

**617** Seeing Ravana in this illusory battle, the cunning Rama and Lakshmana, mounted on celestial lions and garudas created by their knowledge, prepared for battle.

**618** Sugrīva, Hanuman, and all the other vidyadharas of their side accompanied them. Rama fought against Ravana, Lakshmana against Indrajit, Sugrīva against Kumbhakarna, Hanuman against Ravikīrti, Angada against Khara, and Indraketu against Keturanja.

**620**  He devoured everyone at that time, but he was unable to digest all those he had eaten, so he seemed to have vomited them up.

Page #350:
---------------------------
322
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, Kumuda, renowned for his warfare, Indravarma by name, Khar, Dushana, and Nila, skilled in illusion, fought. 621 || Similarly, other valiant servants of Rama fought with the leaders of Dasasyas in a battle of illusions. 622 || Then, seeing Dasanana defeated in battle by Rama, Indrajit entered the fray to protect his life. 623 || Seeing him, Rama struck him down with his Shakti. Observing this, the king of birds, enraged, charged towards Lakshmana's elder brother, armed. 624 || In the midst of this, Lakshmana swiftly intervened, and Dasakantha, mounted on an illusory elephant, enveloped him in a barrage of arrows. 625 || "Even with the Mahavarana, the valiant one with the Garuda flag, like a lion cub, was fearless in the face of enemy forces. 626 || Breaking through that cage of arrows with his own skill, Ravana, seeing this, enraged, ordered his trusted Chakra to be brought. 627 || At that time, Narada and others roared like lions in the sky. The Chakra, like a personified embodiment of valor, circled around Lakshmana and settled on his right arm. 628 || With that Chakra, Lakshmana, the wielder of the Chakra, severed the head of the king of birds, as if into three pieces. 629 || He, due to his past misdeeds, had already been bound to hell. Thus, he received the terrible fate of hell, what else could be the fate of the wicked? 630 || Completing the victory, Keshava declared safety for all enemies. That is the Dharma of victorious kings. 631 || Then, the remaining ministers of Paulastya, like bees, soiled, took refuge at the feet of the Chakra-wielding Lord. 632 || To alleviate the sorrow of Mandodari and other goddesses, Rama and Lakshmana made Vibhishana the king of Lanka and bestowed upon him all the wealth that had come down from the lineage of Dasakantha. Thus, the two brothers, Balabhadra and Narayana, became the powerful masters of the three worlds. 633-634 ||

Page #351:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**1**

Then, Sita, virtuous and dwelling in the Ashoka grove, filled with joy at the news of the victory in the battle, was visited by Vibhishana, Sugriva, and Angada. They saw her as was proper, informed her of the victory celebration, and joined her with Rama, like another Lakshmi. Just as skilled artisans adorn a great gem with a garland, or skilled poets embellish words with beautiful meaning, or virtuous men adorn their intellect with Dharma, so they joined Sita with Rama. For through the bond of true friends and servants, desired achievements are attained. 

**2**

Sita, bearing the pain of separation from her beloved, was filled with joy at the sight of Rama. Rama, too, was overwhelmed with grief arising from the separation from Sita. Upon seeing each other, they experienced supreme joy. The king, attaining the third nature, found joy in Sita, and Sita, in the king. 

**3**

They recounted to each other all that had happened since their separation, for lovers find happiness in sharing their joys and sorrows. Rama, recognizing Sita's innocence, declared that Ravana, the guilty one, had been slain. Thus, the virtuous Rama always acted according to his conscience. 

**4**

Then, the brothers left Lanka and arrived at the mountain called "Splendid Peak." There, the kings of the gods and celestial beings, with great joy, performed their ablutions with the waters of all holy places and showered them with a thousand and eight golden pitchers, lifted by their own hands. Lakshmana, lifting the "Kotik" stone, was pleased by its greatness, and Rama, filled with joy, roared like a lion. 

**5**

Sunanda, the Yaksha who resided there, worshipped them with great joy and presented Lakshmana with the "Saunandaka" sword, a weapon of great renown. 

**6**

Then, the brothers, traveling along the Ganges, reached the vicinity of the "Ganga Gate." They established their camp in the forest, and Lakshmana, mounting his chariot, entered the city through the gate. He bent his bow slightly and released an arrow marked with his name, aiming it at the dwelling of the Magadha king. 

**7**

Seeing the arrow, the Magadha king, realizing his own meager merit, praised Lakshmana, the great and virtuous Chakravarti.

Page #352:
---------------------------
324
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the god gave him a necklace, a tiriṭa, a kundala, and a śara, all placed within a pot filled with holy water. || 650 || Then, going to the ocean, he reached the Vijayanta gate. Subduing the Varatanu there, just as he had subdued the eastern one, || 651 || he obtained a kaṭaka, a sājadā, a chūlāmaṇi, a head ornament, a praiveyaka, a cakrī, and a kaṭīsūtra. || 652 || Then, coming to the west, he entered the Sindhu gate, and, entering the ocean, he subdued Prabhasa, just as before. || 653 || Prabhasa gave him a garland called Santanak, a white umbrella with a net of pearls hanging from it, and other ornaments. || 654 || Then, going along the bank of the Sindhu, he gave his orders to the inhabitants of the western region and received their best goods. || 655 || Facing east, he subdued the inhabitants of Vijayā, obtaining elephants, horses, weapons, vidyadhara maidens, and many jewels. He made the mleccha inhabitants of the eastern region pay taxes, and then departed victorious. || 656-657 || Thus, Lakshmana subdued sixteen thousand pattabandha kings, one hundred and ten city-lords, and the gods of the three regions. His conquest of the directions was completed in forty-two years. Gods, vidyadharas, and earthly kings served him with folded hands. Thus, Lakshmana, the lord of the cakraratna, who walked ahead of his elder brother Ramachandra, and who was worshipped by all, entered Ayodhya, like Indra, adorned with auspicious garments and sought by the beautiful Kanta. || 658-661 || Then, when a pure lagna and auspicious muhurta arrived, the leaders of men, vidyadharas, and vyantara gods gathered together and placed the glorious Rama and Lakshmana on a single throne. They anointed them with a thousand and eight large pots of gold filled with holy water. Thus, they established them as rulers of the three regions and prayed that their Lakshmi might increase and their fame spread to the ends of the directions. After praying, they adorned them with large jeweled crowns, and with jeweled...

Page #353:
---------------------------
## The Astashashta Parva (Chapter 325)

They adorned the two with crowns and jeweled ornaments, and with great blessings, they worshipped them with eagerness. || 665 ||

Prithvisundari, the chief among them, was as beautiful as Keshava's beloved. There were sixteen thousand queens, all as glorious as Lakshmi. || 666 ||

There were eight thousand queens, starting with Sita, who were as dear to Rama as his life. Sixteen thousand countries and sixteen thousand kings were under their sway. || 667 ||

There were nine thousand eight hundred and fifty Dronamukhas, twenty-five thousand Pattanas, twelve thousand Karvatas that granted wishes, twelve thousand Matambas, eight thousand Khetkas, forty-eight crore villages that yielded great fruits, twenty-eight islands within the ocean, forty-five lakh large elephants, the same number of excellent chariots, nine crore horses, forty-five crore foot soldiers who were valiant in battle, and eight thousand gods known as Ganabaddha. || 668-672 ||

Ramachandra had four great treasures: the Halaayudha named Aparajita, the sharp arrow named Amogha, the mace named Kaumudi, and the necklace named Ratnavatsika. Each of these treasures was guarded by a thousand Yaksha deities. || 673-674 ||

Similarly, Lakshmana had seven treasures: the discus named Sudarshana, the mace named Kaumudi, the sword named Saunandaka, the invincible Shakti, the bow named Shanga, the five-mouthed conch named Panchajanya that made a great sound, and the great jewel named Kaustubha, which shone with its own brilliance. Each of these treasures was guarded by a thousand Yaksha deities. || 675-677 ||

Thus, the time of these two fortunate brothers, who were immersed in the ocean of happiness, passed by with their enjoyment and wealth. || 678 ||

One day, the Jina, known as Shivaguapta, arrived at the beautiful garden called Manohara. Rama and Lakshmana, filled with faith and wisdom, approached him with great humility and worshipped him. || 679 ||

Being close to self-realization, Rama and Lakshmana, with their unwavering faith, asked the Jina about Dharma. || 680 ||

Page #354:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

326
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the main purpose of the discourse is to benefit the worthy souls.  The Jina, Shivagupta, also spoke, his words like a radiant moon illuminating the assembly.  || 681 ||  He explained the nature of the nine substances, including the soul, through the means of Pramana, Nayas, Nikshepa, and Anuyoga, which are the causes of knowledge.  The acceptance of the primary and secondary Nayas, which are the strength of the knowledge, leads to the understanding of the substances through the categories of 'Syadasti' (perhaps it is), 'Syannaasti' (perhaps it is not), etc.  || 682 ||  Apart from this, Shivagupta Jina also explained the nature of the liberated soul, the Margana, the Gunasthanas, the aggregation of souls, the nature of the cycle of existence, other aspects related to Dharma, which are logical and justified, the different types of Karma, their fruits, which are the various forms of happiness and suffering, the cause of bondage and liberation, the nature of liberation and the liberated soul.  || 683-685 ||  Hearing this detailed explanation of Dharma, all the wise men, including Ramachandra, accepted the vows of a Shravaka.  || 686 ||  However, Lakshmana, being attached to worldly pleasures, due to the fault of Nidana Shalya, was bound by a terrible life in hell.  Therefore, he did not accept Samyagdarshan, etc.  || 687 ||  Thus, Rama and Lakshmana spent some years in Ayodhya in comfort.  Later, they handed over the kingdom to Bharata and Shatrughna and, along with their families, went to Varanasi.  They entered the city, rejecting the illusory pleasures of Indra, and lived there with their wealth.  || 688-689 ||  Ramachandra had a son named Vijayarama, who was like a god, and Lakshmana had a son named Prithvichandra, who was like the moon.  || 690 ||  Both Ramachandra and Lakshmana, blessed with prosperity and the fruits of Dharma, Artha, and Kama, enjoyed their lives surrounded by their sons, grandsons, and other descendants.  || 691 ||  One day, Lakshmana was sleeping comfortably on a bed made of Nagavahini.  He had three dreams: first, an elephant uprooted a banyan tree; second, Rahu swallowed the sun and took it to the netherworld; and third, a part of a white, tall palace made of lime fell down.  || 692 ||  Waking up from these dreams, he went to his elder brother Ramachandra and respectfully narrated all the dreams as he had seen them.  || 693-694 ||  The priest, upon hearing this, said, "The uprooting of the banyan tree indicates that Lakshmana will suffer from an incurable disease."  || 695 ||

Page #355:
---------------------------
## The Eighth Sixty

The eclipse of the sun by Rahu signifies the decline of fortune, enjoyment, and lifespan. The collapse of your grand palace will lead you to the forest of penance. || 696 ||

Hearing these words in solitude, Rama, the knower of truth, being courageous and magnanimous, did not experience any mental distress. || 697 ||

Considering the welfare of both worlds, he proclaimed that no one should harm any living being, for compassion is the essence of all. || 698 ||

He performed the peace-offering and the bath of the omniscient, and gave charity to the needy, fulfilling their desires. || 699 ||

Due to his depleted merit, Lakshmana, after a few days, was afflicted by a severe illness, caused by the arising of his karmic debts. || 700 ||

Due to this incurable disease, the lord of the wheel-jewel, Lakshmana, departed to the fourth earth, Pankaprabha, on the last day of the dark fortnight of Magha. || 701 ||

His heart consumed by the fire of grief due to Lakshmana's separation, Rama, through the power of knowledge, somehow stabilized his own mind. He performed the funeral rites of his younger brother according to the scriptures, and with cheerful words, pacified the sorrow of the entire palace. || 702-703 ||

In the presence of all, he bestowed the kingdom upon the eldest son of Lakshmana, born to the beautiful queen Prithvisundari, and personally crowned him. || 704 ||

Sita had eight sons, all of virtuous character, named Vijayarama and others. The seven elder sons did not desire the kingdom and its wealth. Therefore, he bestowed the position of Yuvaraja upon the youngest son, Ajitajnjay, and gave him the kingdom of Mithila. He himself, renounced the world, the body, and worldly pleasures. || 705-706 ||

Renouncing everything, he went to the forest of Siddhartha, near Ayodhya, which was a sacred place due to the initiation ceremony of Lord Rishabhadeva. There, he met the powerful Kevali, Shivgupta, and gained a clear understanding of the causes and fruits of worldly existence and liberation. || 707-708 ||

When he learned from the Kevali that Lakshmana had gone to the fourth hell due to the fault of the nidana-salya, his mind became even more pure. He renounced all attachment to Lakshmana, and through the knowledge of the Abhinibodhika, he understood the truth revealed by the Vedas, as explained by Sugriva, Hanuman, and others. || 709-710 ||

Page #356:
---------------------------
328
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Vibhishana and five hundred kings, along with eighty of their sons, embraced the path of Sannyam. ||711|| Similarly, Sita, the Mahadevi, and Prithvi Sundari, along with other deities, received initiation near the Shanta Aryika. ||712|| The king and the prince, having taken the vows of a Shravak, bowed down to the feet of the Jina and entered the city. ||713|| Rama and Anuman, both Munis, practiced the path of liberation according to their capacity and in accordance with the scriptures, becoming Shruta Kevali. ||714|| The remaining Munis also attained the sevenfold wealth of wisdom, etc. Thus, after three hundred and ninety-five years of the Chhadmastha period, due to the brilliance of the Shuddha Dhyana, the Muni Ramachandra, who was a destroyer of harmful karmas, attained Kevala Jnana, like the sun. ||715-716|| Adorned with the unique powers of the single umbrella, etc., the Kevali Ramachandra, through the rain of Dharma, watered the plants of the Bhavyas, who were like grains. ||717|| In this way, after spending six hundred years with Kevala Jnana, on the fourteenth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Phalguna, he ascended the peak of Sammed Shikhar, and, having attained the three Yogas, he took refuge in the fourth Shuddha Dhyana, called Samuccchhinna Kriya Pratipati, and destroyed all his harmful karmas. Thus, with the destruction of the three bodies, Audarika, Taijasa, and Karman, he attained the highest position, along with Anuman, etc. ||718-720|| Vibhishana, etc., some attained the Anu-disha, and Sita, Prithvi Sundari, etc., the wives of Rama and Lakshmana, were born in the Achyuta heaven. ||721|| The remaining wives were born in the first heaven. Lakshmana, having emerged from hell, will gradually embrace Sannyam and attain the wealth of liberation. ||722|| This is indeed the case, for there is such diversity among beings. ||723|| Those who crossed the ocean like a Gopa, who surrounded the enemy's city with their army like a small house, who uprooted the enemy's entire lineage like a grain, and who, along with Lakshmana, abducted the enemy's daughter, the earth's daughter, ||724||

Page #357:
---------------------------
— Ashta-Shat-Perv
326 Shārdūlavikrīḍitam
Two who were proud with their heads raised high, like the sun and moon,
Two who were lords of the three parts of the southern half of the Bharata-khand,
They resided in Saketa, their brilliance eclipsing even the sun of the month of Jyeshtha,
Two heroes, whose prowess subdued the pride of the serpents of the directions. || 725 ||
Adorned with a string of jewels, famous from the beginning with the name of Sīrā,
They were blessed with the enjoyment of the fruits of their good deeds, and satisfied all who came to them.
Like the sun and moon, they illuminated the world with their brilliance and fame,
The glorious Balabhadra and Narayana, protectors of this earth for a long time. || 26 ||
One of them, though equal in enjoyment, became superior due to the results of his actions,
And resided happily on the peak of the three worlds,
While the other became the leader of the fourth hell.
Therefore, the Āchārya says, "A wise man should never be like a fool." || 724-727 ||
The life of Rāvaṇa was first as a king named Naradeva in the country called Sārasamuccaya.
Then he became a god in the Saudharma heaven, a storehouse of happiness.
After that, he was expelled from there and was born in the lineage of Vinami, the king of the Vidyadharas in this Bharata-khand.
He was Rāvaṇa, who attacked the garland of the shining heads of all the Vidyadharas, a womanizer, a destroyer of his own lineage, like a comet, and a leader of the wicked. || 728 ||
The life of Lakshmana was first...
1. Dwipasarpadarpashaman-la.
2. Prabudho ka, pa.
3. Deva.

Page #358:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**330**
**Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana**

**Verse 730:**
Manimati, the Vidyaadhari, adorned with the jewels of virtues, became extremely angry and met her end due to the curse. From her arose Sita, the daughter of Janaka, who was known for her fame and adherence to good vows.

**Verse 731:**
In the Malaya country, there was a prince named Chandrachula, who was extremely wicked. In his later life, he performed austerities and became a celestial being named Sanatkumara in heaven. From there, he came down to earth and became Lakshmana, the half-moon.

**Verse 732:**
Ramachandra's previous life was as a friend of Chandrachula, the son of the minister of the Malaya country. He was known as Vijay. In the third heaven, he was known as Kanakachula, a celestial being who enjoyed divine pleasures. He was then born as Ramachandra, the son of the Sun dynasty, possessing immense strength.

**Verse 733:**
May Balabhadra, the Lord of Lords, who is far removed from the evil arising from the wicked deeds that cause suffering, who has humbled all the Indras, who is omniscient, devoid of attachment, and the repository of all happiness, grant us our desired fulfillment.

**End of the 68th Parva:**
Thus ends the 68th Parva of the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which narrates the stories of Muni Suvrata Tirthankara, Harishena Chakravarti, Rama, Balabhadra, Lakshmidhara (Lakshmana), Narayana, Sita, and Ravana.

Page #359:
---------------------------
## The 67th Chapter, Whose Name is Also the Lotus of the Heart for the Liberation of Beings

May the merciful Namīnātha, whose very name is sufficient for liberation, grant us all the wealth of liberation soon. ||5||

In this Jambudvīpa, in the land of Bhārata, in the country of Vatsa, there is a city called Kauśāmbī. In this city, a king named Pārthiva ruled. ||2||

He was like the eye of the Ikshvāku dynasty, he held Lakshmi on his chest, he was extremely powerful, and he adorned himself like a true Chakravartin, conquering all directions. ||3||

He had a son named Siddhārtha, born to his beautiful queen Sundā. One day, the king went to the garden called Manohara. There, he saw the Muni named Muni-vara, the possessor of the eye of supreme knowledge, and humbly asked him about the nature of Dharma. The Muni explained the true nature of Dharma. Hearing this, the king became detached. He began to think: "In this world, beings take birth with the capital of death, becoming debtors to death. ||4-6||

In every birth, they suffer countless sorrows, increasing their debt, and become miserable, falling into misfortunes, or becoming poor. Until this being earns the wealth of the three jewels and pays the interest on the debt to the creditor of death, how can he attain health? How can he be happy?" Having decided this, he began to strive to destroy the enemy of karma. ||7-8||

The wise king Pārthiva, having given his kingdom to his son Siddhārtha, who was skilled in the scriptures and capable of protecting the people, went to the feet of the venerable Muni Muni-vara and took the Jina-dīkshā. This is right, for this is the nature of the virtuous. ||9-10||

The powerful Siddhārtha also attained right faith, took the vows of the Aṇuvrata, etc., and ruled his people, enjoying pleasures with happiness. ||11||

As time passed, one day he heard of the death of his father, Pārthiva Muni-raja. Hearing the news of his death, his desire for worldly things vanished. He quickly went to the garden called Manohara and, from the Kevali Bhagavān named Mahābala, learned the detailed meaning of the truth. ||12-13||

Page #360:
---------------------------
332
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, after giving the kingdom to his son, Sri Datta, he attained the state of Kshayika Samyaktva and, being peaceful, took up the practice of Samyama. || 14 || That Purushottama, having taken up the eleven Angas, bound himself with the sixteen Karana Bhavanas, and performed the auspicious karma of the Tirthankara, which is the last name. || 15 || At the end of his life, he attained Samadhi-death and became a radiant deva in the excellent, unsurpassed Vimana called Aparajita. || 16 || There, his lifespan was thirty-three oceans, his body was one hand tall, and he was endowed with all the characteristics of the devas of that Vimana, such as breathing, eating, and Leshya. || 17 || When the end of this Ahamindra's life came, and he was ready to depart from there after six months, there was a city called Mithila in the country called Vanga, in this Jambudvipa, adorned with the Jambubhumi tree. There, a wealthy king named Vijayamaha raja, a descendant of Bhagavan Rishabhadeva, belonging to the Kashyapa gotra, ruled. || 18-16 || Just as the rising sun makes the world red with affection, so too, when he ascended the throne, he made the whole world happy with affection. And just as the sun itself becomes free from the redness of passion, so too, he freed the world from the redness of passion. In the same way, as the king became free from the joy of detachment, so too, he freed the world from the joy of detachment. In short, the happiness and unhappiness of the world depended on him, and rightly so, because he had done such penance, and such was its effect. || 20 || Since the rise of his virtuous karma had brought about a multitude of virtues and Lakshmi had chosen him, the three Purusharthas of Dharma, Artha, and Kama were well manifested in him. || 21 || In that king's kingdom, if there was heat, it was only in the sun, there was no other heat-suffering. If there was anger, it was only in the lustful people, not in the others there. If there was the name of conflict, it was only in the bodies, not elsewhere. If there was detachment, it was only in the munis, there was no lack of attachment-affection in the other people there. The taking up of the meaning of others, the taking up of the meaning expounded by other poets, was only in the bad poets, not in the other people there. The binding, the creation of various bindings, such as the umbrella binding, was only in the poems, not in the other people there, who were not bound by ropes and other things. If there was debate, it was only in the learned who desired victory, not in the other people there, who did not have conflict. The spread of the arrow, the spread of a type of grass, was only in the rivers, not in the people there, who did not have the spread of arrows. If there was instability, it was only in the celestial beings, who were constantly
1 Ahamindra. 2 In the book, the reading is 'Shravneet Gunaneva Sarvan Mukatodayat'. In the second pada, there is a mistake.

Page #361:
---------------------------
The Mahadevi of Vijay Maharaj was named Vappila. The gods worshipped her with showers of jewels, and the goddesses Shri, Hri, Dhriti, etc., served her. On the first Dwitiya of Sharad, i.e., Ashwin Krishna Dwitiya, with the Ashwini Nakshatra and in the last watch of the night, when the Lord was descending from heaven, the Mahadevi, sleeping peacefully, saw the sixteen dreams she had previously been told about. 

At that time, she saw an elephant entering her mouth. Seeing this, her sleep vanished, and hearing the sound of the morning drums, she was filled with joy. 

She asked the king, who had the knowledge of the world as his eyes, about the meaning of these dreams. The king replied that a future Tirthankara had taken birth in her womb. 

At that very moment, Indra arrived and, according to his duty, celebrated the festival of the Lord's descent from heaven - the Garbha Kalyanak. After that, everyone went to their respective places. 

Vappila Mahadevi gave birth to the Lord, the most powerful and eldest son, the master of all the worlds, on Asharh Krishna Dashami, with the Swati Nakshatra Yoga. 

The gods arrived at that time and celebrated the Janma Kalyanak, and they named the child, who had pierced the enemy of delusion, as Naminath. 

When sixty lakh years had passed in the Tirthankara lineage of Lord Munisuvratnath, Naminath Tirthankara was born. 

Lord Naminath's lifespan was ten thousand years, his body was fifteen Dhanus tall, and his radiance was like gold. When two thousand and five hundred years of his Kumarakala had passed, he received the kingdom after his coronation. 

Thus, the Lord ruled for five thousand years. One day, when the sky was filled with the clouds of the rainy season, Lord Naminath, the bearer of great prosperity, mounted an elephant like another Sun, and went for a forest walk. 

At that time, two Devakumaras, who had come from the sky, joined their hands in salutation and prayed as follows. 

They said, "In this Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, there is a country called Vatsakavati. There is a city with strong boundaries, called Vimananaparajita."

Page #362:
---------------------------
334
The Tirthankara Aparajita, born from the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, has emerged. The Devas, led by Indra, have come to pay homage to him. || 35 || In their assembly, the question arose: "Is there a Tirthankara in Bharat now?" The omniscient Aparajita, knowing all, replied: || 40 || "In the land of Vanga, in the city of Mithila, resides Naminatha, who is destined to become a Tirthankara, born from the lineage of Aparajita." || 41 || "He is currently enjoying the pleasures brought by the Devas, living as a householder." || 42 || "O Devas, we both were residents of the Dhataki Khanda island in our previous birth. We performed austerities there and were born in the heaven called Saudharma. The next day, we went to pay homage to the Kevali Aparajita. Hearing his words, we came here out of curiosity to see you, who are worthy of worship." || 43 || Having absorbed all this in his heart, the Lord, destined for Kevala Jnana soon, returned to the city. || 44 || Remembering the Tirthankara Aparajita of Videha Kshetra and his connection with his past lives, he began to contemplate the nature of worldly emotions. || 45 || He thought: "This soul, bound by endless chains, has imprisoned itself in the cage of the body. Just as a sinful bird suffers in a cage or an elephant chained to a stake, this soul is constantly in pain. Though it experiences various sorrows, it clings to them. Driven by an intense desire for sensual pleasures, it remains attached to worldly objects, like a maggot in filth." || 48 || "This being fears death but runs towards it, desires to escape suffering but accumulates it. Alas, how unfortunate! Its intellect has been distorted by the intense longing born from sorrow and anger. It wanders endlessly through the four realms of existence, tormented by the consequences of its sins. May this foolishness, which is strong and ancient, and hinders the attainment of desired goals, be destroyed!" || 50 || Thus, through the power of detachment, he distanced himself from worldly pleasures and attachments. At that moment, all the liberated beings, including Sarasvata and others, paid homage to him. || 51 || The destruction of karma...

Page #363:
---------------------------
The 67th Chapter

335

Having received the worship of the gods upon attaining liberation, he mounted the beautiful chariot called Uttarakuru. [53] He went to the Chaitravan garden, having taken the vow of the sixth fast. In the dark fortnight of Ashadha, on the tenth day, in the Ashwini constellation. [54] In the afternoon, he took the vow of non-violence along with a thousand Kshatriyas. He also attained the fourth stage of knowledge, the knowledge of the nature of the soul. [55] The king Datta, who was like gold in complexion, gave him food in the city of Virpur, and he attained the five wonders. [56] After nine years had passed in the state of concealment, he sat in meditation in his own initiation grove, under a beautiful Bakul tree, having taken the vow of the sixth fast. On the last day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, in the Ashwini constellation, on the third Nanda day, the Lord attained omniscience, which illuminated all things. [57-58] At the same time, Indra and the other gods celebrated the festival of the fourth stage of knowledge. [59] There were seventeen Ganadharas, including Supribha. There were four hundred and fifty knowers of all the past. There were twelve thousand six hundred teachers who had taken the vow of good conduct. There were one thousand six hundred holders of the knowledge of the senses. There were the same number, one thousand six hundred, who were omniscient. There were fifteen hundred holders of the power of miracles. There were twelve hundred and fifty non-attached knowers of the nature of the soul. There were one thousand preachers. Thus, the total number of monks was twenty thousand. There were forty-five thousand Aryikas, including Mangini. There were one hundred thousand Shravakas, and three hundred thousand Shravikas. There were countless gods and goddesses, and a countable number of animals. [60-65] Thus, the Lord Naminayana, with his twelve assemblies, preached the right Dharma and wandered everywhere in the Aryan land. When one month of his life remained, he stopped wandering and went to reside on the Sammed Shikhar.

Page #364:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**336**

In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, having abandoned the body, having abandoned the body, having abandoned the body, he spent a month on Sammeva Parvata. There, he resided with a thousand munis, engaged in the practice of pratima yoga. ||17||

In the month of Vaisakha, on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, at the end of the night, in the Ashwini constellation, the Tirthankara Naminatha attained liberation. ||18||

The gods, having performed the fifth Kalyanak of the Lord of all beings, Naminatha Tirthankara, having received their own share of merit, departed to their respective abodes. ||69||

Whose body shone like gold, who had conquered the enemies of the soul, who had achieved victory over all evils, who was praised by the gods with the words "Victory, Victory," who was the master of learned disciples, and who finally abandoned his body and attained liberation, may Lord Naminatha destroy the great fear of the world for all of us. ||70||

In the third birth, he was a famous king named Siddhartha in Kaushambi. There, he performed severe austerities and became a god in the fourth, unconquerable, celestial chariot. From there, he came to Mithila and became the twenty-first Tirthankara, Naminatha, who revealed words for the benefit of the three worlds, who was worshipped by the Indras, who was adorned with the dust of the feet of the gods, and who was showered with flowers carried by bees. May Lord Naminatha, whose lotus feet are constantly enjoyed by the bees of his disciples, grant continuous satisfaction to them. ||71-72||

May the twenty-first Tirthankara, Naminatha, who conquered the three worlds, who destroyed the power of delusion, and who attained the wealth of liberation, grant us the wealth of liberation. ||73||

1. Naminatha Tirthankara, Mahapurana, Uttara Purana.
2. Victory over the enemies of the soul, or victory over the enemies of the soul was achieved by him. The world is the cause of birth, may we be liberated from it.

Page #365:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

In the northern part of this Jambudvipa, there is a vast region called Airavata. In its city of Shripura, there lived a king named Vasundhara, blessed with Lakshmi. || 74 ||

His mind was deeply afflicted by the separation from Padmavati. He went to a beautiful and delightful forest, where he sought the counsel of the omniscient Varacharma. || 75 ||

He resolved to uphold the principles of Dharma and entrusted his responsibilities to his son Vinayandhara, a man of humility. He then, along with many other kings, embraced restraint and practiced rigorous austerities, ultimately attaining the status of a Deva in the Maha-Shukra heaven. || 76-77 ||

He enjoyed divine pleasures for sixteen Sagara-kalpas, but then he was reborn in the Vatsa region of this very Tirthankara's Tirtha. He was born as the son of Prabhakari, the queen of the Ikshvaku dynasty king Vijay, the ruler of Kaushambi. || 78-79 ||

He was endowed with all auspicious qualities and was named Jayasena. He lived for three thousand years, stood sixty cubits tall, had the radiance of polished gold, possessed fourteen jewels, was served by nine Nidhis, enjoyed ten types of pleasures, and was the eleventh Chakravarti. || 80-81 ||

One day, he was lying on the roof of his grand palace, surrounded by his inner court. || 82 ||

He was gazing at the sky, resembling the full moon, when he saw a meteor falling. This sight filled him with detachment, and he began to ponder: "Look, this luminous object was high above, but now it has quickly descended, losing its brilliance and leaving behind its two phases." || 83-84 ||

"My own brilliance and strength are also great," he thought, succumbing to pride. This foolish being, who did not engage in actions beneficial for his soul in the afterlife, instead remained attached to fleeting and unsatisfying worldly pleasures. Like the meteor, he too would lose his brilliance and descend into lower realms. || 85-86 ||

Reflecting on this, the Chakravarti, with his simple intellect, decided to relinquish his kingdom, including his Chakra, due to the influence of time and other factors. He wished to renounce his worldly possessions and embrace renunciation. || 87 ||

He offered his kingdom to his elder sons, but they, driven by a noble desire for spiritual pursuits, declined. He then gave it to his younger son, Varadatta. || 88 ||

Page #366:
---------------------------
## 338
Having obtained restraint from the Kevala Jnana, he became equal to many in the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana. He was adorned with Shruta, Buddhi, Tapa, Vikriya, and Oushadhi. || 8 || He also attained the Charana state and took refuge in Prayopgamana. || 10 || He became the Ahminndra in the Jayanta, the highest of the Uttunga Kuta, the Charana peak, where he worshipped the Self. || 11 || 
Born as the king Vasundhara in the first birth, he performed austerities and became a Deva with the lifespan of sixteen oceans. He then became the Chakravarti Jayasena and then the Ahminndra, the treasure of happiness in the Jayanta Vimāna. || 12 || 
Thus ends the sixty-ninth chapter of the Trishatti Lakshana Mahapurana, composed by Bhagavadguna Bhadracharya, which narrates the Purana of the Tirthankara Naminatha and the Chakravarti Jayasena. 
1. Ahminndra. 2. Maro'jani La.

Page #367:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

Those who uphold the ten virtues of forbearance, etc., are the spokes of the wheel of true Dharma, and may the glorious Neminath be our peace. ||1||

This Purana, which is the source of merit for the Jinas, the Narayanas, and the Balabhadra, is a generator of spiritual fervor, and I bow to this knowledge for the purification of mind, speech, and body. ||2||

Having performed auspicious rites, I shall narrate the Purana called Hari-vamsa, as it happened, and as I have heard it. ||3||

In the Jambudvipa, in the western region called Videha, on the northern bank of the river Sitoda, in the country called Sugandhila, there is a city called Singhapura. In this city, King Arhaddasa ruled. His queen was named Jinadatta. Both of them, due to the fruition of their past virtuous deeds, were enjoying the pleasures of love and desire. Thus, their time passed happily. One day, Queen Jinadatta, after performing the great eight-hour worship of the Jina, expressed her desire to have a son who would be the ornament of her family. With this hope, she slept soundly and happily that night. In her dream, the virtuous queen saw five auspicious visions: a lion, an elephant, the sun, the moon, and Lakshmi. Immediately after this dream, a blessed soul entered her womb, and after nine months, she gave birth to a strong son. From the time of his birth, his father was invincible to his enemies, and so his relatives named him Aparajita. ||4-10||

He grew up with all the qualities of beauty and virtue, and by the time he reached youth, he was as handsome as Indra among the gods. ||11||

One day, the king heard from a forest guard that the Tirthankara Vimalavahan had arrived in the beautiful garden called Manohara. Filled with devotion, he went there with his queens and family. Upon arriving, he circumambulated the Tirthankara, folded his hands in reverence, prostrated himself, and offered worship with incense, flowers, and rice. He then drank the nectar of Dharma, free from worldly desires. ||12-14||

Page #368:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
Having given the sevenfold wealth to his son Aparajita, he, the elder, took up the great penance with five hundred kings. || 15 || The Kumar Aparajita, having taken the vows of Anuvrata, etc., and being of pure vision, entered his capital city, adorned with Lakshmi, just as Indra enters Amaravati. || 16 || He entrusted the worries of his own kingdom and foreign kingdoms to his ministers, and himself, following the path prescribed by the scriptures, became absorbed in Dharma and Kama. || 17 || Once, he heard that his father, along with the Lord Vimala Vahan, had attained liberation on Mount Gandhamadana. Hearing this, he vowed, "I will not eat until I have seen the Lord Vimala Vahan." Due to this vow, he fasted for eight days. || 18-19 || Then, by the command of Indra, the Yakshapati showed the king the great auspicious form of the Lord Vimala Vahan, allowing him to have darshan. King Aparajita, after worshipping and paying homage to the Lord Vimala Vahan in the Jain temple, ate. It is right, for how can one contemplate the truth when one's mind is afflicted by affection and sorrow? || 20-21 || On one day, during the Ashtahnika of the spring season, the wise king Aparajita, having worshipped the Jain images and praised them, was sitting there giving a Dharma discourse, when two Charana-Riddhi-dhari Muni-rajas arrived from the sky and sat there. After the praise of the Jina-deva was finished, the king, with great humility, went before them and bowed at their feet, listened to their Dharma discourse, and then said, "O Revered Ones! O Bhagavans! I have seen you before." The elder of the two Munis said, "Yes, O King! You are right, you have seen us both." || 22-25 || But where did you see us? I will tell you, listen. In the Pushkara-advipa, in the western part of the western direction of Sumeru, there is a great river. On the northern bank of that river, there is a great country called Gandhila. In the northern range of the Vijayardha mountain of that country, the king Surya Prabha, the lord of the city of Surya Prabha, ruled. His wife's name was Dharini. Their eldest son was Chinta-Gati, the second was Manogati, and the third was Chapal-Gati. || 26-28 || Then, with swift speed, they went to those three. For a long time, they were satisfied with Dharma, Artha, and Kama, for they were good sons. || 29 ||

Page #369:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
341
In the same northern range of the Vijay mountain, in the city of Arindama, there lived a king named Arinjay. His queen was named Ajit Sena, and they had a daughter named Pritimathi. She had conquered all the Vidyadharas by making three circumambulations of Mount Meru, leaving behind the Chinta Gati.  ||30-31||
After this, Chinta Gati, having conquered her with his speed, said, "Accept my younger brother with a garland of jewels." Hearing this, Pritimathi said, "I will not place this garland around the neck of anyone other than the one who has conquered me." In response, Chinta Gati said, "Since you fought the Gati battle with my younger brothers with the desire to obtain them, you are therefore to be abandoned by me." Hearing these words of Chinta Gati, she became detached from the world and went to the Aryika named Vivritta and took up excellent austerities. Seeing this, many people there became detached and took initiation. ||32-35||
Seeing this courage of the girl, Chinta Gati, who had developed dispassion, also went to the Guru named Damavara along with his two younger brothers and took up restraint. Having obtained the teachings and purifications, the three brothers became Samajik Jati Devas in the fourth heaven. ||36-37||
Having enjoyed many pleasures there for the lifespan of seven oceans, they were born again. The two younger brothers were born in the Videha region of the eastern part of Jambudvipa, in the Pushkala country, on the northern bank of the Vijay mountain. In the city of Gaganavallabha, there lived a king named Gaganchandra and his queen Gagan Sundari. We, Amitmati and Amittej, were born as their sons. We were both endowed with all three types of knowledge. ||38-40||
On another day, we both went to the city of Pundarikinya. There, we asked the Tirthankara Shri Swayamprabha about our previous three births. Then, the Lord Swayamprabha told us the whole story as it was. After that, we both asked, "Where is our elder brother born now?" In response, the Lord said, "He is born in the city of Singhapura, his name is Aparajit, and he is shining, ruling his own kingdom." ||41-43||
Hearing this, we both went to the same Swayamprabha

Page #370:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
He had enjoyed all the pleasures that arose from his good deeds. Now, you have only a month left to live, so think about your own well-being. || 45 || Hearing these words, the king bowed to the two great sages and said, "Even though you have attained the state of liberation, you have done me a great favor out of your love from past lives. You are truly my well-wishers." Pleased, the two sages then returned to their own place. || 46-47 || Then, the king, giving his kingdom to his son, Pritikara, performed an eight-day worship, bid farewell to his brothers, and took up the excellent renunciation called Prayopgamana. Due to the influence of renunciation, he became Achyutendra, the lord of the Satamkara Vimana in the sixteenth heaven, with an age of twenty-two oceans, possessing great powers. He enjoyed the divine pleasures there for a long time and then fell from there. || 48-50 || In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, in the Kurujangala country, he was born as the son of King Shrichandra of Hastinapur, named Supratistha, a glorious son born to his queen, Shrimati. When he reached full youth, he had a wife named Sunanda, who brought him happiness. || 51-52 || Considering his son to be very capable, King Shrichandra gave him the kingdom and himself went to the great sage, Sumandara, and took initiation. || 53 || Supratistha also became well-established in his kingdom without any obstacles. One day, he offered food to the sage Yashodhara, which led him to attain the five great virtues. || 54 || On another day, he was sitting in his beautiful palace, as bright as the moonbeams, with his inner court, looking in all directions, when he suddenly saw a meteor falling. Seeing this, he realized the impermanence of the world. Then, he performed the coronation of his eldest son, Sudrishti, and, seeking knowledge of the self, took initiation from the Jina, Sumandara. He gradually mastered the eleven Angas and contemplated the sixteen causes of meditation, including right faith, etc., and bound the pure karma of a Tirthankara. When his life came to an end, he took samadhi and practiced renunciation for a month, due to which he attained the position of Ahmendra in the Anuttar Vimana called Jayanta. There, his life was as long as thirty-three oceans, with his hands reaching up to the sky. || 55-59 ||

Page #371:
---------------------------
Saptatitimaparva
343
At the end of sixteen and a half months, he exhaled without any disturbance. After the passage of thirty-three thousand years, he experienced the state of enjoyment. 6 Being absorbed, without any contemplation, the limit of his knowledge of the world-channels was reached. He was endowed with the qualities of strength, brilliance, and transformations, etc., only to the extent of that region. 61 Thus, in the divine state, he experienced the great ocean of divine happiness. Having attained complete satisfaction, he remained in eternal blissful longevity. 62 Thereafter, the narration of his lineage is made. In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharata region, there was a country named Vatsa. 63 In the famous city of Kaushambi, there was a king named Maghavan. His queen was Vitashoka. In due course, their son named Raghu was born. 64 In that very city, there lived a very wealthy merchant named Sumukha. At one time, a Vaishya named Veeradatta, son of a merchant, came to Kaushambi city from the Kalinga region, along with his companions and his wife Vanamala, due to the fear of hunters. 65-66 Sumukha, the merchant, provided him shelter in Kaushambi city. One day, while Sumukha was wandering in the forest, he saw Vanamala. Cupid, as it were, made him his target with his sharp arrows - he was struck by the arrows of desire. 67-68 Thereafter, the deceitful and sinful merchant sent Veeradatta away for twelve years, providing him with abundant livelihood, and wrongfully accepted the corrupted Vanamala as his own wife. 69 After twelve years, when Veeradatta returned, upon hearing about the incident, he contemplated on the miserable state of the world. 70 Distressed by sorrow, devoid of merits, and without any refuge, Veeradatta renounced the world and took refuge with the ascetic Proshthila. 71 At the end of his life, he renounced and attained the divine state of Chittrangada, the lord of the Saudharma heaven, who is the abode of contemplative happiness. 72 The merchant Sumukha and Vanamala also, one day, provided alms to the ascetic Dharmasingha, and condemned their own misdeeds. 73 The next day, they both met the same end by the falling of the forest. They were the lords of enjoyment in the Harivamsha region of Bharata. 74-75

Page #372:
---------------------------
344
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, the king of Vasulaya, Vajrachapa, had a daughter named Vidyumala, who was born to his queen Subhama. Vidyumala was beautiful and radiant, like lightning. She was the wife of Singhketu, who was in the prime of his youth. 76-77

One day, while the couple was enjoying a stroll in the forest, they were spotted by the celestial being Chitrangada, who decided to take them away, thinking, "I will kill them." 78

In a previous birth, the king of the city of Bhogpur, Prabhanjan, was a close friend of the merchant, Sumukh. Due to his practice of Anuvrata, he was reborn as a celestial being named Suryaprabha in the Saudharma heaven. Seeing Chitrangada, Suryaprabha said, "Listen to me, what good will you gain by killing these two? This act will bind you to sin, it is not for those who act with reason, it will only lead to suffering, the fruit of the tree of Samsara. Therefore, you should leave this couple." He repeated this many times. Hearing this, Chitrangada was moved with compassion and released the couple. 80-82

Then, Suryaprabha comforted the couple and, knowing that they would find happiness in the future, left them in the forest of Champapur. 83

At that time, the king of Champapur, Chandrakirti, died without an heir. To ensure the continuity of the royal lineage, the wise ministers decided to find a worthy and virtuous successor. They sought out a well-omened elephant, offering it incense and other offerings. 84-85

The divine elephant went to the forest and, due to the power of past good deeds, found Singhketu and Vidyumala. He lifted them onto his back and brought them back to the city. 86

The ministers, filled with joy, performed the coronation ceremony for Singhketu. They seated him on the throne and adorned him with a royal sash. 87

Then, they asked him, "Whose son are you and where did you come from?" Singhketu replied, "My father is Prabhanjan and my mother is Mrikandu, adorned with virtues. I am the moon of the pure sky of the Hari dynasty. A celestial being brought me here and left me in the forest with my wife. I have been living in the forest ever since." 88-89

Hearing this, the people recognized him as the son of Mrikandu and named him Markandeya. 90

Thus, Markandeya, brought to the city by divine intervention, ruled for a long time. His descendants were known as the Harihimagir dynasty. 91

Page #373:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
345
Many kings had passed before, including Vasugiri. At that time, the valiant king Shurasen, the lord of the city of Shouryapur in the land of Kusharth, who was like the sun in the sky of the Hari-Vansh, was famous for his bravery and had defeated all his enemies. He had a valiant son named Shuravir, whose wife was Dharini. They had two sons, Andhakavrishti and Naravrishti. 
92-94
Andhakavrishti's queen was named Subhadra. They had ten sons, all as radiant as the moon: Dharmavan Andhakavrishti, Stimitsaagar, Himavan, Vijay, Vidvan Achal, Dharan, Puran, Puritarthichchh, Abhinandan, and Vasudev. They also had two daughters, Kunti and Madri, who were as radiant as the moon. 
95-97
The nine elder sons of Andhakavrishti had nine wives, all the most excellent women in the world: Shivdevi, Dhriti-shwara, Swayamprabha, Sunita, Sita, Priya-vak, Prabhavati, Kalingi, and Suprabha, who gave them pleasure. 
98-99
Naravrishti, the second son of Shuravir, had a queen named Padmavati. They had three virtuous sons: Ugrasen, Devsen, and Mahasen. 
100
They also had a daughter named Gandhari. All these sons and daughters were very fortunate. 
101
Meanwhile, in the city of Hastinapur, the Kuru king Shakti ruled. He had a son named Parashar, born to his queen Shatki. Parashar had a son named Vyasa, born to a princess of the Matsya clan named Satyavati. 
102
Vyasa's wife was named Subhadra. They had three sons: Dhritarashtra, Pandu, and Vidur. 
103
Once, a Vidyadhar named Vanamali went to the forest of Hastinapur to play. He forgot his ring and left it there. Pandu was also wandering in the same forest. He saw the ring and picked it up. When the Vidyadhar remembered his ring, he returned to the forest and searched for it. Seeing him searching, Pandu asked him what he was looking for. The Vidyadhar said that he had lost his ring. Pandu showed him the ring. The Vidyadhar asked him what he would do with it. 
104-107

Page #374:
---------------------------
346
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the celestial being Bhadraisha told Kamrupa about the means of achieving the four aims of life.  He said, "These are some of the days of the brothers, and others are in the constellation Mrigashira." [1.8]
Seeing the power of this, the guest said, "I see the power of this." And he gave it to him. Pandu, in his invisible form, then had intercourse with Kunti. [1.9]
From this union, a son named Karna was born.  Later, unknown to others, a son named Manjusha was born, with earrings. [1.11]
He was adorned with a jeweled armor, a letter, and a baby.  Kunti's attendants released him into the current of the Kaliṅga river. [1.11]
The king of Champapur, named Aditya, saw the floating chest and opened it.  He was amazed to see the child, like a young sun, inside.  He thought, "This child will be for my queen Radha."  With this thought, he gave the child to Radha.  When Radha saw the child, he was touching his ears, so she respectfully named him Karna. [1.12-1.13]
After all this, King Pandu had a Prajapati marriage with Kunti and Madri.  From Kunti, a righteous king named Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma, was born. [1.14-1.15]
Then, Bhima and Arjuna were born.  These three sons were like the three aims of life: Dharma, Artha, and Kama.  Similarly, Madri's eldest son was Sahadeva, followed by Nakula. [1.16]
Gandhari was given to Dhritarashtra, and their first son was Duryodhana.  After him, Dushasana, Durdharshana, and Durmarsana were born.  All of them were one hundred strong and mighty warriors.  Thus, the time of all of them passed pleasantly and playfully. [1.17-1.18]
On another day, the sage Supratishtha, the king of the munis, arrived at Mount Gandhamadana.  The valiant king Shuravira, along with his sons, grandsons, and others, went to pay their respects to him.  He went there, worshipped him, praised him, and listened to his teachings on Dharma.  Hearing these teachings, his mind became filled with fear of the world.  Therefore, he performed the coronation ceremony and gave the kingdom to Andhakavrushti.  He thought, "This one is worthy," and appointed his younger son Naravrushti as the Yuvaraja.  Then, he himself took up restraint and practiced austerities on Mount Gandhamadana. [1.19-1.21]
After twelve years had passed, while Supratishtha was standing there, holding the image of the deity, the god Sudarshana, in anger, caused a disturbance. [1.22-1.23]
The ring fell.  In response, Pandu showed him the ring.  Then, Pandu asked the vidyadhara, "What is the use of this?"  In response, the vidyadhara said, "O Bhadra! This ring can change its form according to your wish."  Hearing this, Pandu requested, "Brother! If this is so, let me keep this ring for a few days, I will see its effect."  At Pandu's request, the vidyadhara gave him the ring.  Pandu, using the ring, made himself invisible and had intercourse with Kunti, from which a son named Karna was born.  Kunti's attendants, so that it would not be known to others, hid the child in a chest, adorned him with earrings and a jeweled armor, and placed a letter with him.  They then released him into the current of the Yamuna river. [1.104-1.111]
The king of Champapur, Aditya, saw the floating chest and opened it.  He was amazed to see the child, like a young sun, inside.  He thought, "This child will be for my queen Radha."  With this thought, he gave the child to Radha.  When Radha saw the child, he was touching his ears, so she respectfully named him Karna. [1.112-1.116]
After all this, King Pandu had a Prajapati marriage with Kunti and Madri.  From Kunti, a righteous king named Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma, was born.  Then, Bhima and Arjuna were born.  These three sons were like the three aims of life: Dharma, Artha, and Kama.  Similarly, Madri's eldest son was Sahadeva, followed by Nakula. [1.117-1.118]
Gandhari was given to Dhritarashtra, and their first son was Duryodhana.  After him, Dushasana, Durdharshana, and Durmarsana were born.  All of them were one hundred strong and mighty warriors.  Thus, the time of all of them passed pleasantly and playfully. [1.119-1.120]
On another day, the sage Supratishtha, the king of the munis, arrived at Mount Gandhamadana.  The valiant king Shuravira, along with his sons, grandsons, and others, went to pay their respects to him.  He went there, worshipped him, praised him, and listened to his teachings on Dharma.  Hearing these teachings, his mind became filled with fear of the world.  Therefore, he performed the coronation ceremony and gave the kingdom to Andhakavrushti.  He thought, "This one is worthy," and appointed his younger son Naravrushti as the Yuvaraja.  Then, he himself took up restraint and practiced austerities on Mount Gandhamadana. [1.121-1.122]
After twelve years had passed, while Supratishtha was standing there, holding the image of the deity, the god Sudarshana, in anger, caused a disturbance. [1.123]

Page #375:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

Having conquered the upsargas and overcome all the obstacles, he became a Kevali by destroying the enemies through meditation. ||24||

The gods, along with Andhakavrsti, came to worship him. Andhakavrsti asked, "O Dev, why did this Dev do this great upsarga upon you, who is worthy of worship?" ||125||

The Jinenadra, the Kevali, Suprithistha, explained, "In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, in the Kalinga country, in the city of Kaji, there lived two Vaisya sons, named Suradatta and Sudatta. ||126-127||

They went to Lanka and other islands and earned a lot of wealth as they wished. When they returned and were about to enter the city, they were afraid of having to pay taxes on their wealth. Out of fear, they buried the wealth outside the city, under a bush, and marked it with some signs. The next day, a man came there to dig up the roots of trees suitable for making liquor. While digging, he found the huge wealth. Seeing the wealth, he thought, "What is the use of digging up these roots for a small profit? I have now found a huge wealth. This will remove all my poverty. I will enjoy the pleasures of this wealth until death." With this thought, he took all the wealth and left. ||128-131||

The next day, when the Vaisya sons came to that place, they did not see their wealth. They accused each other of taking the wealth and fought with each other, killing each other. Due to anger and greed, they were bound to the hell of Narakayu and went to the first hell. After suffering the torments there for a long time, they came out and became rams in the caves of Vindhyachal. There, they killed each other again and became bulls in Gokul, which was situated on the banks of the Ganga. There too, due to the poison of past lives, they fought and died and became monkeys on the Sammed Shikhar, who were wise and equal to humans. ||132-135||

There too, they quarreled over the water coming out of the stone. One of them died quickly, and the other died with his throat choked. At that time, two Charana Munirajas, named Suraguru and Devguru, who were Siddhacharis, arrived there. They recited the Pancha Namaskar Mantra to him, which he listened to with great eagerness. He died after listening to the Dharma Shravana and went to the Saudharma heaven.

Page #376:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana
In the Saudharma Kalpa, a deva named Chitrangada was born. From there, he went to the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, and was born as the son of King Susthit, the ruler of the beautiful city of Podanpur, and his queen, Sulaksana. He was a wise and well-established son, known as Supratistha.  || 138-139 ||

Once, at the beginning of the rainy season, he saw two monkeys fighting on Mount Asit. This reminded him of his past lives and his actions. || 140 ||

He then approached Sudharma Acharya and took diksha. He was the same soul as Suradatta, and I, Supratistha, am his younger brother.  || 141 ||

Wandering in the world, Suradatta eventually reached the banks of the Sindhu river, where he was born as the son of the ascetic Mrigayana and his wife, Vishala. He was named Gotama. Due to his wrong beliefs, he became a Jyotishka deva named Sudarsana, performing austerities amidst the five fires.  || 142-143 ||

He then used his maya to harm me. Hearing this, Supratistha, the Kevali, spoke with compassion, and Sudarsana, freed from his animosity, embraced the right path. || 144 ||

Hearing about the rain of the Andhakas, King Andhakavrushti, with folded hands, asked the Jina, Supratistha, about his past lives. || 145 ||

The Jina, free from attachment, replied, "It is right to ask, for speaking words of benefit without any motive is the natural quality of those like me." || 146 ||

He said, "In this very Jambudvipa, in the city of Ayodhya, there lived a king named Anantavirya. In the same city, there lived a wealthy merchant named Surendradatt, who was like Kubera. He worshipped the Arhant with ten dinars daily, sixteen on the eighth day, forty on the new moon, and eighty on the fourteenth. He spent his wealth in this way, gave to the deserving, followed the path of virtue, and observed fasts.  || 147-148 ||

Because of all this, he became known as 'Dharmashila', free from all sins. One day, he wished to travel by water to earn wealth. He planned to return after twelve years, so he entrusted his friend, the Brahmin Rudradatt, with the wealth needed for twelve years of worship of the Jina. He said, "Use this to perform Jina puja and other good deeds, for you are like me." || 149-152 ||

1. Tatpraha Kha.

Page #377:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

153. Having gone there, that Brahmin, due to his addiction to gambling and other vices, spent all his wealth in a few days.

154. Then, the wicked Brahmin, addicted to theft and other evil deeds, was seen by the police officer named Shyenaka, while he was stealing in the night.

155. "Since you bear the name of a Brahmin, I will not kill you. Go away from this city. If you are seen committing such evil deeds again, I will surely send you to the mouth of Yama, the god of death."

156. Thus, the wicked Kalaka, the lord of the Bhils, who lived in Ulkamukhi, rebuked him.

157. Once, in the city of Ayodhya, that Brahmin had come to steal a herd of cows. He was killed by the police officer Shyenaka and went to hell due to his great sin.

158. From there, he became a great fish, then a serpent named Haridristivisha, then a lion, then a bird, then a serpent, and then a Bhil.

159. Having gone through all the hells and endured great suffering, he was born as a stationary being and wandered for a long time.

160. In the Jambudvipa, in the Kurujangala country, in the city of Hastinapur, when King Dhananjaya was ruling, he was born as the son of a Brahmin named Kapishtala, from his wife Anundhari.

161. As soon as he was born, his entire family was destroyed. He did not get any food to eat, his stomach was shrunken, his bones were visible, his body was covered with sores, his hair was full of lice, and he was always scolded wherever he slept.

162. He always carried a skull in his hand, like a true friend who never leaves his side.

163. He was always begging for food, like a thirsty man who wants water. He was so greedy that he could never be satisfied.

164. Like a crow on the day of a sacrifice, he wandered around looking for food. He endured the heat, cold, and wind like a donkey.

165. When the Seth went to the market, Rudradutta, the Brahmin, spent all his wealth on women and gambling.

166. Then, he became addicted to theft and other evil deeds. Shyenaka, the police officer, saw him stealing one night.

Page #378:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, describes a being named Maladhari, who was constantly tormented by the elements, cold, heat, and wind. He was always covered in dirt and only desired the pleasures of the tongue, his other senses having been lost. Like a king who always carries a staff to punish those who disobey, Maladhari always carried a staff, ready to strike. 

This being, born in the seventh hell, was a manifestation of the darkness that pervades the souls of those who dwell there. He was the color of lentils or ink, or perhaps a dark mass of shadows, afraid of the sun. He was repulsive, a sinner, and even when he was fed to his heart's content, his eyes still seemed unsatisfied. He wore tattered and torn clothes, full of holes, and his body was covered in wounds that stank. Flies buzzed around him constantly, never leaving him, and he was constantly enraged by them. Children from the city would follow him, throwing stones and tormenting him. He would chase them, but would always fall down, suffering greatly. 

One day, he encountered a Muni named Samudra Sena, who was traveling to the house of the merchant Vaishravana for a meal. The merchant also fed Maladhari to his heart's content. After eating, Maladhari went to the Muni's ashram and begged him to make him like him. The Muni, seeing his sincerity, decided to take him in and observe him for a while. After some time, he taught him the practice of Samayama, the path to peace. 

Within a year, Maladhari gained wisdom and other powers, and became known as Gotama, taking on the role of his teacher. At the end of his life, his teacher ascended to the higher plane of existence, the Suvishala Vimana, becoming an Ahmindra. Gotama, too, at the end of his life, practiced his devotions diligently and attained the same plane of existence, becoming an Ahmindra in the Suvishala Vimana. 

He enjoyed the divine pleasures of that realm for a long time, but eventually, after 28 lifetimes, he was reborn again.

Page #379:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
351
The wise one, contemplating that he was known as Ajanyandhakavrusti, again asked the Jina about the connection of his sons in previous births. || 18 ||
He, with the nature of all languages, spoke with his divine sound. || 182 ||
In the Jambudvipa, in the Mangala country, there was a city called Bhadrailpur. In that city, King Megha-ratha ruled. His queen's name was Subhadra. They had a son named Dridharatha. By his good fortune, he had received the crown of the heir apparent. || 183 ||
In the same Bhadrailpur city, there lived a merchant named Dhanadatta, whose wife's name was Nandayasha. They had nine sons: Dhanapal, Devapal, Jindev, Jinpal, Arhadatta, Arhahas, the seventh was Jindatta, the eighth was Priyamitra, and the ninth was Dharmaruchi. Besides these, they also had two daughters: Priyadarshana and Jyestha. || 185-186 ||
Once, in the Sudarshana forest, the Muni-raja named Mandir-sthavira arrived. King Megha-ratha and the merchant Dhanadatta, along with their sons, grandsons, and others, went to him. King Megha-ratha, hearing the nature of Dharma with its practices, became detached. Therefore, he gave his position to his son Dridharatha, and after his coronation, he took the vow of non-violence. After that, the merchant Dhanadatta also took the vow of non-violence with his nine sons. Nandayasha, the merchant's wife, went to the Aryika named Sudarshana with her two daughters and quickly decided on the nature of the world. She also took the vow of non-violence. Gradually, they all went to Varanasi and from there, they went to the Priyangu-khanda forest, which was full of beautiful trees. There, their Guru Mandir-sthavira, King Megha-ratha, and the merchant Dhanadatta, all three became Kevala-jnani by meditating. After that, they continuously showered the nectar of Dharma. They were worshipped by the Indras of the three worlds and at the end of their lives, they attained the state of Siddha near the Siddha-sila in the city of Rajagriha. On another day, the nine brothers, the two sisters, and Nandayasha took the vow of non-violence according to the proper procedure on the same Sila-tal. Seeing them, Nandayasha, who was with her sons and daughters, decided that just as they were her sons and daughters in this birth, they would also be her sons and daughters in the next birth. And her relationship with them would continue in the next birth just as it was in this birth. Having made this decision, she herself also took the vow of non-violence. || 187-195 ||
That Brahmin Muni, having completed the lifespan of twenty-eight Sagaras, was released from there and you became the king named Andhakavrusti. Thus, contemplating his previous births, the wise Andhakavrusti again asked the Jina about the connection of his sons in previous births. || 180-181 ||
The Jina, with his divine sound, which could transform into all languages, spoke in this way: || 182 ||

Page #380:
---------------------------
352
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, she was born in the Shatankara Vimana and enjoyed its pleasures. After twenty oceans of lifespan, she was born as your queen, Subhadra.  Her sons, Dhandeva and others, were renowned for their valor, like Samudravijaya.  Her daughters, Priyadarshana and the eldest, Kunti and Madri, were also famous.  After hearing all this, the king of Andhaka-Vrishni, asked the well-established Jina about the lineage of Vasudeva.  187-198

The Jina also spoke about the auspicious lineage of Vasudeva in his deep voice, saying, "It is right, for their nature is such that they always bless the worthy beings." 166

He said, "In the village of Palashakuta in the Kuru country, there lived a Brahmin named Somasharma.  He was poor from birth.  He had a son named Nandi.  Nandi's maternal uncle was named Devasharma.  He had seven daughters.  Nandi wanted to marry his maternal uncle's daughters and was always with him.  But because of his lack of merit, Devasharma gave his daughters to someone else.  Nandi was very sad because he did not get the daughters." 200-202

Then, one day, out of curiosity, he went to see a performance by actors.  There was a crowd of strong warriors there, which he could not bear.  He fell down.  Seeing him fall, the others clapped their hands and laughed at him.  He was very ashamed of this incident and decided to jump from the top of a mountain. 203-204

He climbed to the top of the mountain and stood on a rock that was cut by a chisel.  He thought about jumping, but he was afraid and could not do it.  He kept getting ready to jump and then backing away. 205

Below, on the earth, there were two monks, Shankha and Nirnaamik, sitting near the Muni Raja, Drumashena, who possessed the three knowledges of Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi.  They respectfully asked Drumashena Muni Raja, "Whose shadow is this?"  He replied, "The one whose shadow this is, will be the father of both of you in the third existence." 206-207

Hearing their teacher's words, his two promising sons went to Nandi and asked, "Brother, why do you want to die?  If you want fortune, good fortune, and other things from this death, you will get them all through the attainment of tapas."  Thus, they made him take up tapas. 208-209

1.  टङ्कछिनैः घ० । टकच्छन्ने ख० ।
2.  दिति ख०, घ० ।

Page #381:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
353
For a long time, he performed austerities and became a great Shukra, a celestial being. There, he enjoyed the desired pleasures for sixteen kalpas.  [21]
Then, he descended from there and became Vasudeva, the ruler of the earth, to subdue it.  [21]
Balabhadra and Narayana will be born from him. [21]
Hearing all this, the king Andhakavrishti, a Vidyadhara, was filled with fear for the world.  [212]
He desired the supreme state of liberation (moksha).  [212]
He gave the kingdom to Samudravijaya, with due ceremony, and renounced all attachments, embracing the path of peace and austerity.  [213]
Along with many other kings, he went to the presence of the well-established Jina and, after practicing restraint, he renounced the world and attained liberation.  [214]
Samudravijaya ruled the earth, ensuring the happiness of all the varnas and ashramas.  [215]
They all engaged in virtuous deeds, as they pleased, according to their dharma.  [215]
Dividing the kingdom among his eight brothers, like the guardians of the directions, the king Samudravijaya enjoyed the kingdom, which brought happiness to all.  [216]
Thus, due to the merit they had accumulated, all of them enjoyed a happy life.  [217]
Vasudeva, the youngest of them all, with his four-fold army, was always eager to display his prowess.  [217]
He would ride out of the city every day, mounted on his elephant, Gandhavarana, surrounded by a retinue of whisks.  [218]
The sound of all the musical instruments played so loudly that it seemed to split the edges of the directions.  [218]
Bards, singers, and storytellers sang his praises, and he was adorned with various ornaments, his body shining brightly.  [219]
He seemed to be ready to subdue the fierce sun with his own brilliance, or to scorn the celestial trees of the celestial beings.  [220]
He was like a prince of the gods, and the women of the city, forgetting their duties, would rush out to see him, ignoring the protests of their mothers and aunts.  [221]
When the prince Vasudeva went out, the citizens were distressed.  [223]
They went to the king Samudravijaya and informed him of the situation.  [223]
Hearing this, the king, filled with brotherly love, was afraid that his brother might be harmed by the sun's rays.  [224]
He thought that he might have to turn back, but he was determined to protect his brother.  [224]

Page #382:
---------------------------
354
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Considering him to be a Kumar, he called him aside and said, "Kumar, your radiance seems different today.  Therefore, you should abandon this pointless wandering in the cold wind, etc. If you desire to wander, then wander around the royal palace, in the water-fountains, in the pleasant forest, in the mansion, on the artificial mountain, etc., along with the ministers, the feudatories, the chief warriors, or the sons of the Mahamatras, etc.  As you wish, wander."  Hearing this, he also acted accordingly. Those with pure intellect accept the words of those who have attained liberation as if they were nectar. 225-228

Thus, while he was wandering, a servant named Nipunamati, who was fond of talking and eager to act as he pleased, said to Kumar Vasudeva, "The king has forbidden you to go out, using this as a pretext."  Kumar asked the servant, "Why did the king do this?"  In reply, he said, "When you go out, your beautiful form is seen, and the women of the city become loose in their character, they become agitated by lust, they abandon shame, they begin to act in a contrary manner, the maidens, the widows, and the widowed women all become like those who have drunk liquor.  Some women have their entire bodies drenched in sweat, some have their eyes half-open, some abandon their clothes, some abandon their food, some scorn their elders, some scold the guards, some neglect their husbands, some do not care for their sons, some consider their sons to be monkeys and throw them away, some wear only a blanket, considering it to be the finest garment, some smear mud on their bodies, considering it to be a cosmetic, some apply kohl to their foreheads, considering it to be their eyes.  Seeing all their women acting in this way, all the citizens of the city became very distressed, and they informed the king by words.  The king has made this arrangement for you using this as a pretext."  Hearing the words of the servant Nipunamati, Kumar desired to test this.  He wanted to go out of the royal palace, so he said to the doorkeepers, "O gods, we have received such an order from your elder brother." 229-239

Page #383:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
355
The gatekeeper, having been forbidden to let you out, stood there.  Fearing disgrace, he did not tell you of the victory of Samudravijaya and the others. || 240 ||  "Vasudeva, having gone away under the pretense of acquiring knowledge, has fallen into the great fire in the cremation ground and perished." || 241 ||  Having written this letter, he tied it around the neck of the horse and released it. || 242 ||  He circumambulated the burning pyre and then quickly left by an unseen path that very night. || 243 ||
Then, at sunrise, the chief of the guards, not seeing the prince in the royal palace, informed the king.  Following the king's orders, they searched for him with many others. || 244 ||  They found the cremated body and the horse wandering nearby. || 245 ||  Taking the letter from the horse's neck, they presented it to the king.  Hearing the contents of the letter, Samudravijaya and the other kings were deeply grieved.  But the astrologer, knowing the auspiciousness and well-being of Vasudeva, calmed them down. || 246-247 ||  Out of affection, the king immediately sent many skilled and enthusiastic servants to search for him. || 248 ||
Having gone to the city of Vijayapura, Vasudeva, the great tree of sorrow, rested under the shade of an Ashoka tree. || 249 ||  Seeing this, the gardener realized that the astrologer's words were true.  He informed the king of Magadha, who then offered his daughter, Shyamala, to Vasudeva. || 250 ||  After resting there for a few days, Vasudeva left.  He reached the Pushparamya lake of lotuses in the Deodar forest and played with a wild elephant. || 252 ||

Page #384:
---------------------------
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, it is said that a certain celestial being, by the name of Angaravega, carried away Kumar Vasudeva from the elephant king. Angaravega was the heir of Ashanivega, the king of the Kinnarageeta city. Ashanivega had a daughter named Shalmalidatta, born to the wind-speed woman, who was like a second Rati. Ashanivega had given her to Kumar Vasudeva in marriage. Kumar Vasudeva, after enjoying the pleasures of love with her, spent some days there. When he wished to leave, Angaravega, seeing him ready to depart, lifted him up and took him to the sky. Shalmalidatta, upon learning this, pursued him with a naked sword in her hand. Fearing Shalmalidatta, Angaravega left Kumar Vasudeva and fled. Kumar Vasudeva was about to fall when the Parnaladvi, a celestial power sent by his beloved Shalmalidatta, gently lowered him onto an island in the middle of the lake near Champapur. There, Kumar Vasudeva asked the people living on the shore how to get out of the island. They asked him if he had fallen from the sky, as he seemed to be unaware of the way out. Kumar Vasudeva replied that they were right, he had indeed fallen from the sky. Hearing his reply, they all laughed and showed him the way out, saying, "You can get out of the water through this path." Kumar Vasudeva, following that path, entered the city and went to the guru of the Gandharva Vidya, named Manohar. There, many students were learning to play the Veena, preparing for the Swayamvara of Gandharvadatta. Seeing them, Kumar Vasudeva, hiding his knowledge of the Veena, pretended to be a fool and said, "I too will practice playing the Veena with these people." Saying so, he took a Veena. First, he broke its strings and then smashed the Tumba. Seeing this, the people laughed heartily and said, "Look at his audacity!" They also said to Kumar Vasudeva, "You seem to be so clever, it seems you will be the husband of Gandharvadatta and defeat us all in the art of singing and playing."

Page #385:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
357
Thus, while Kumar Vasudeva was present there, those who could travel through the earth and sky, the Gandharvas and the Datta, arrived, eager for Gandharvadatta's Swayamvara. || 267 ||
Gandharvadatta, who had herself conquered many in the Swayamvara hall, then captivated them all with her singing and playing. || 268 ||
Charudatta and others, who were the main listeners, praised her, saying that her skill in the arts was truly extraordinary. || 269 ||
Then, after asking his teacher, Vasudeva approached the maiden and said, "Bring me a vina that is free from any defect." || 270 ||
They presented him with three or four vinas. Vasudeva, smiling, said, "These vinas have a defect called 'lomamsa' in their strings, and a defect called 'shalka' and 'pashana' in the 'tumbi' fruit and the 'danda'. " He not only said this, but also showed them the defects. Seeing this, the maiden said, "Then what kind of vina do you want?" In response, the Kumar said, "The vina that I desire has a story like this." Saying this, he narrated the following tale. || 271-273 ||
The king of Hastinapur, Megharatha, had two sons, Vishnu and Padmaratha, from his queen Padmavati. || 274 ||
After some time, King Megharatha, along with his son Vishnukumar, went to perform austerities, and Padmaratha became the king. || 275 ||
On another occasion, a king from a neighboring territory caused unrest in the kingdom. The chief minister, Vali, pacified him through diplomacy and other means. || 276 ||
King Padmaratha, pleased with Vali's work, said, "What do you desire? What do you want? Speak!" In response, Vali said, "I want to rule for seven days." The king, considering Vali's request as insignificant, like dry grass, agreed to give him the kingdom for seven days. It is right, for those who know the value of favors done, that is, those who are grateful, do not withhold anything from the one who has done them a favor. || 275-278 ||
At that time, a group of munis, including Akampana Guru, arrived in Hastinapur and took up the 'atapan yoga' on the gentle mountain there. Earlier, when Vali, the minister, was in the city of Ujjayini, he had been defeated by Akampana Guru in an assembly of learned men. Therefore, he was filled with sinful anger and wanted to kill him. || 279-280 ||
...

Page #386:
---------------------------
358
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, the minister Vali, taking advantage of the Yajna, started to prepare food around the mountain for the purpose of giving alms to the needy and for the appeasement of the gods. The smoke and flames from the cooking spread everywhere. Knowing this, the Muni Vishnukumar, realizing the affliction, went to the king Padmaratha and sat on the Vitaraga seat. The king Padmaratha worshipped him, offered him obeisance and asked, "What is your wish?" 
The Muni Vishnukumar said to the king Padmaratha, "Your minister has created an affliction for the Munis who are practicing the Atap Yoga. You should remove it quickly."
The king replied, "I have already agreed to give him the kingdom for seven days. Therefore, I cannot stop him for fear of breaking my word. O Venerable one! You alone can remove this evil now. The wicked, who are free, do not know the difference between right and wrong actions."
Hearing this reply, the Muni said, "Then I will stop this wicked one, who is soon to perish."
Saying this, he assumed the form of a dwarf Brahmin and went to Vali. He blessed him and said, "O Great one! Today you are the chief among givers, therefore I have come to you. You should give me something." Vali agreed to give him his desired object.
Then the Brahmin, Vishnukumar, said to the Muni, "O King, I want three steps of land from you. Give me this." Hearing the Brahmin's words, Vali said, "This is a very small area. Why did you ask for so little? Take it." Saying this, he poured water on the Brahmin's hand and gave him three steps of land. What happened then? The Muni, with his power of expansion, placed one foot on the highest peak of the Manushottara mountain and the other, shining with brilliance, on the peak of Mount Sumeru.
At that time, the Vidyadharas and the Bhoomigocharas, all praised the Muni and said, "O Lord! Please retract your steps. Do not be angry, for it is the cause of the world."
Thus, the Bhoomigocharas and the Vidyadharas, whose voices were filled with music and the sound of the Veena, quickly pleased the Muni, and he also retracted his steps.
At that time, the gods were very pleased to hear their music, which was full of auspicious signs. They praised the great sound of the Ghosha and the Sugosha.

Page #387:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

356

They gave four veenas, namely,  Ghosha, Sugosha, Mahaghosha, and Ghoshavati. Of these, two veenas were given to the Vidyadharas and two to the earth-dwellers, respectively. || 296 ||

The Muni, having asked in vain, said to Vali, "I have requested you because I have no space for the third step."  || 297 ||

The powerful Vishnu Muni, having bound the strong Vali, quickly removed the unbearable affliction of the Munis. || 298 ||

The king, Padmaratha, was ready to kill the bound Vali, but the Muni, with a happy mind, stopped him and made Vali accept the right Dharma. || 299 ||

Thus, the great Muni, having established the influence of Dharma, was honored by King Padmaratha and then went to his own place. || 300 ||

After narrating this story, Kumar Vasudeva said to Gandharvadatta, "Of the four veenas given by the Devas, the Ghoshavati veena has come to your lineage. Therefore, please bring that auspicious veena for me." || 301 ||

Hearing this, they brought the same veena for him. Vasudeva, with that veena, sang and played, delighting the minds of all the listeners. || 302 ||

Seeing Vasudeva's great skill in playing the veena, Gandharvadatta was pleased and offered him a garland of her own, like a garland of jewels, around the neck of the one with a beautiful voice, who had subdued all the kings. || 303 ||

"Indeed, those who have done good deeds in the past, receive great wealth themselves," said Vasudeva. || 304 ||

Then, everyone rejoiced and performed the auspicious Abhishek for Vasudeva. In this way, Vasudeva, honored by the Vidyadhara kings with the gift of daughters, etc., on the Vijayardha mountain, received seven hundred daughters. || 305 ||

Then, Vasudeva, the bearer of supreme happiness, returned from the Vijayardha mountain and came to the earth. || 306 ||

King Hiranyavarma of the city of Arishtapura had a daughter named Rohini, born to his queen Padmavati. She truly resembled the wife of the moon, Rohini. || 307 ||

Many kings, like the main teachers, came for her Swayamvara, possessing many arts and qualities. But Vasudeva, as if separate from everyone, sat there, as if to declare, "I am the teacher of all." || 308 ||

Rohini, with a mind troubled by longing, embraced Vasudeva's neck with a garland of jewels, as if it were her own strength. || 309 ||

Then, various boundaries, like the conquest of the ocean, etc., arose. Like the ocean, they approached her, causing turmoil. || 310 ||

Page #388:
---------------------------
360
Seeing all those wicked-minded ones, who were eager to abduct Rohini, all the kings, including Hiranyavarma, along with their brothers, prepared to fight. ||310-311|| Vasudeva Kumar, too, immediately shot an arrow marked with his name towards Samudravijaya. ||312|| Seeing the name inscribed on the arrow, Samudravijaya was astonished and said, "Oh, by the grace of fortune, I have found Vasudeva." Pleased, he stopped the war immediately and, along with his younger brothers, went to meet Vasudeva, the conqueror of Manmatha. ||313-314|| Vasudeva, with folded hands, greeted Samudravijaya and pleased him. He then pleased his other elder brothers by greeting them. ||315|| The Bhukhecharas, along with their daughters, who had been married earlier, came to meet Vasudeva with great joy. Samudravijaya and others, along with Vasudeva Kumar, entered their city, which was filled with festivities, and they all continued to enjoy their desired pleasures. ||316-317|| Thus, their time passed happily with the enjoyment of imperishable and praiseworthy pleasures. After some time, the soul of Shankha Muni, whose story has been told earlier, was born as the son of Rohini, the wife of Vasudeva, in the Maha-Shukra heaven. His name was Padma, and he was a virtuous son. He was the ninth Balabhadra, who brought joy to his brothers. ||318-319|| His pure intellect was as radiant as the sun's rays. Just as the sun's rays, after being nourished by the autumn season, promote the growth of lotuses, so too, his intellect, nourished by the scriptures, promoted the birth of Lakshmi. ||320|| His power was insurmountable, he destroyed the wicked, and he protected the virtuous. How could his power not surpass even the essence of the sun's rays? ||321|| Now, another story related to this is told. At the confluence of the Ganga and Gandhavati rivers, there were many fruitful trees. Among those trees, there was a settlement of ascetics called Jatharakausika. The leader of that settlement was the ascetic Vashishtha, who practiced the Panchagni Vrata. One day, two Charana Munis named Gunabhadra and Virabhadra came there. They saw his penance and

Page #389:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

The two ascetics, Gunabhadras and Charanas, heard the statement, "This is ignorance-born tapas," and asked, "What is my ignorance?"  The wise one, Gunabhadras, stood before them, filled with anger, and was ready to speak, for the righteous ones always speak for the benefit of others. 

He pointed to the lice and mites born from the matted hair, the dead minnows stuck in the matted hair during continuous bathing, and the various insects writhing within the burning fuel, saying, "Behold, this is your ignorance."

Vasistha, a wise man with a unique intellect, relying on the opportunity of time, performed tapas with fasting, having taken initiation and residing in the sun-facing posture. 

Due to the greatness of his tapas, seven Vyantara Devis appeared before him and said, "O Muni, tell us your desired message, we are ready to fulfill it."

Seeing them, the Muni said, "I have no need of you in this birth. Come to me in another birth."

Performing tapas in this way, he gradually reached Mathurapuri. There, he observed a one-month fast and practiced the sun-facing yoga.

The next day, King Ugrasena of Mathura saw the Muni with great devotion and declared in the city, "This Muni will only accept alms in our house, not elsewhere." He prohibited everyone else from giving alms. On the day of his parana, the Muni entered the city for alms, but at that moment, a fire broke out in the royal palace. Seeing this, the Muni returned to the forest without taking any food.

The Muni again observed a one-month fast. After a month, the Muni, with a weakened body, entered the city again, desiring food. He saw an elephant being agitated, and immediately returned to the forest, observing another month-long fast. When he went to the royal palace again for food after a month, King Ugrasena was disturbed by a letter sent by King Jarasandha, and did not pay attention to the Muni.

As the weakened Vasistha Muni was returning, he heard people saying, "The king neither gives alms himself nor allows others to give."

Page #390:
---------------------------
362
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the king's intention is not known. Hearing this, the Muni, enraged by the rise of sin, made a decision.  ||339||  He thought, "As a result of my intense penance, I will become the son of this king, subdue him, and seize his kingdom." ||340||  Thus, due to this evil outcome, the Muni died and was born in the womb of Queen Padmavati, the wife of King Ugrasena, due to intense animosity. ||341||  Even Padmavati, due to the cruelty of the child in her womb, desired to eat the flesh of the king's heart, and she became distressed. Knowing this, the ministers, using their intelligence, gave her a fabricated thing, saying, "This is the flesh of your husband's heart. Thus, the fulfillment of your desire is proper, for what do intelligent people not do?" ||342-343||  Queen Padmavati, whose desire was fulfilled, subsequently gave birth to that sinful son. At the time of his birth, he was biting his lips, his gaze was cruel, and his eyebrows were crooked. ||344||  Seeing him, his parents thought, "This is not fit to be raised here."  Considering this, they decided to abandon him. They had a casket made of bronze, placed the child inside with a letter, and released it into the flow of the Yamuna River. ||345-346||  In the city of Kaushambi, there lived a woman named Mandodari, a washerwoman. She saw the casket floating in the river and, upon seeing it, picked it up and raised the child as her own, like a mother to her son.  Indeed, even the small merits of ascetics can accomplish great things. ||347-348||  After some time, he grew strong and began to torment all the children who played with him, hitting them with slaps, fists, and sticks.  Distressed by his evil conduct, Mandodari abandoned him, driving him out of her house. ||349-350||  He then went to Shouryapur and became a servant of King Vasudeva, always devoted to his service. ||351||

Now, we tell another story related to this. King Jarasandha, although he had conquered all the kings, still had some unfinished business. To complete it, Jarasandha sent letters to all the kings, saying, "The king...

Page #391:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

He will bring to me, bound, the half of the kingdom and my virtuous daughter, born of the Kalinda clan, named Jivadyasha, after defeating in battle our enemy, the king Simharatha, by his own strength.  The valiant king Vasudeva, upon receiving this letter, had the horses of his chariot anointed with the urine of a lion, harnessed them, and mounted the chariot.  He then went to battle and conquered the mighty Simharatha, and had him bound by his servant, Kansa, and delivered him to the king Jarasandha.  Jarasandha, pleased, was ready to give Vasudeva half the kingdom and his promised daughter.  But Vasudeva, seeing the ill-omened signs of the daughter, said, "I did not bind Simharatha, it was Kansa who did it, so give this daughter to him, who is your obedient servant."  Hearing this, Jarasandha, to know the lineage of Kansa, sent his messenger, Mandodari, to him.  Seeing the messenger, Mandodari was afraid, thinking, "Has my son committed some crime there?"  She took the casket and went herself to Jarasandha.  Arriving before the king, she placed the casket of Kansa on the ground, saying, "This casket is his mother."  Then, bowing, she said, "This child was placed in the casket of Kansa and was being carried away in the waters of the Yamuna.  I took him and raised him."  Since he had come in the casket of Kansa, the villagers called him Kansa.  He is naturally proud of his valor and is free-spirited even in childhood.  Hearing this, Jarasandha took the letter from the casket and read it aloud.  It said that he was the son of king Ugrasena and queen Padmavati.  Knowing this, Jarasandha was pleased and gave Kansa his daughter Jivadyasha and half the kingdom.  When Kansa heard that he had been abandoned by his parents at birth, he was enraged.  His old hatred grew stronger.  He went to Mathurapuri, imprisoned his parents, and placed them on the top of the city gate.  What will not wicked people do when they are angry?

Page #392:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, the North Purana

Then, the king Vasudeva, known as Devaseena, and his wife, the human Devaki, were brought to Kansa. [369] Kansa, who was second to none in power, was happy to have them. At that time, the Muni Ati Mukta came to the palace for alms. [370] Seeing him, Jivadyaasha, with a smile and joy, gave Devaki's flower-scented clothes to the Muni. [371] "This is Devaki's effort to show her respect to you, Muni," she said. Hearing this, the Muni, filled with anger, said, "This Devaki's son will surely kill your husband." [372] Hearing this, Jivadyaasha, filled with anger, tore the clothes in two. [373] "He will not only kill your husband, but also your father," said the Muni. Hearing this, Jivadyaasha, filled with anger, trampled the clothes with her feet. [374] Seeing this, the Muni said, "Devaki's son will protect the earth, like a woman protects her husband." [375] Jivadyaasha, understanding everything as she had heard, went to Kansa and explained everything to him. [376] Kansa, fearing the Muni's words, even if spoken in jest, went to Vasudeva with great affection and requested, "By your permission, Devaki should come to our house during her delivery and complete the delivery rituals." [377] Vasudeva, persuaded by Kansa's request, agreed. It is true that even the great Munis can make mistakes when it comes to inevitable events. [378-379] The Muni, again, went to Devaki's house for alms. Devaki, standing up, welcomed him with the proper rituals. After offering him food, Devaki and Vasudeva asked him, "Will we ever be able to take initiation?" Knowing their intention, the Muni said, "Why do you ask so deceitfully? You will have seven sons. Six of them will grow up in other places and attain Nirvana. The seventh son will become a Chakravarti and rule the entire earth under his umbrella for a long time." [380-383] Hearing this, Devaki was overjoyed. Later, she gave birth to two pairs of sons in three births. [384]

1. Tavyabhedayat
2. Snehadevamayacha
3. Damstaha
4. Channata
5. Gnanavata

Page #393:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

The celestial being, known as Naigamarsha, residing in the city of Bhadraila, was instructed by Indra. He took the sons of Devaki, who had died immediately after birth, and placed them before the daughter of a merchant named Alaka in the city.  [385]

Naigamarsha, knowing Devaki's secret, gathered the three pairs of dead sons and placed them before her. [386]

Kamsa, seeing the dead sons, thought, "What harm can these lifeless sons do to me? Even a sage can be a liar." [387]

Though he thought this, his doubts remained. He threw the dead sons onto a stone slab. [388]

Later, in the seventh month, Devaki gave birth to a son, who was destined to be great. This son was born from the womb of Devaki, but was destined to be raised by Nanda in Gokul. [389]

Vasudev and Balabhadra, wise in the ways of the world, decided to raise the child in secret at Nanda's house, without informing Kamsa. [390]

Vasudev carried the child, while Balabhadra held a parasol over him. The night was dark, but the child's merit caused the city deity to transform into a bull, standing before them. [391]

The bull had two horns, adorned with lamps of brilliant gems, which dispelled the darkness. [392]

As soon as the child's feet touched the ground, the city gate, which had been closed, opened. [393]

Ugrasena, seeing this from his prison, asked in astonishment, "Who is opening the gate at this time?" [394]

Balabhadra replied, "Be silent, this child will soon free you from your bonds." [395]

Ugrasena, pleased, said, "So be it." He blessed them. [396]

Vasudev and Balabhadra left and reached the banks of the Yamuna. The river, influenced by the future chakravarti, divided into two streams, making way for them. [397]

Who, being of the same caste, would not offer shelter and brotherhood? [398]

Vasudev and Balabhadra, crossing the Yamuna in wonder, went to Nanda's house. They saw Nanda returning with a baby girl. [399]

Seeing them, Nanda asked, "Bhadra, how did you come here at night? You are alone." [400]

Nanda said, "Indra learned that all the sons of Devaki were dying immediately after birth. He instructed Naigamarsha, who knew Devaki's secret, to take the sons and place them before Alaka, the daughter of a merchant in Bhadraila. Naigamarsha, following Indra's instructions, took the sons and placed them before Alaka, where they died immediately after birth. [384-386]

Kamsa, seeing the dead sons, thought, "What harm can these lifeless sons do to me? Even a sage can be a liar." [387]

Though he thought this, his doubts remained. He threw the dead sons onto a stone slab. [388]

Later, in the seventh month, Devaki gave birth to a son, who was destined to be great. This son was born from the womb of Devaki, but was destined to be raised by Nanda in Gokul. [389]

Vasudev and Balabhadra, wise in the ways of the world, decided to raise the child in secret at Nanda's house, without informing Kamsa. [390]

Vasudev carried the child, while Balabhadra held a parasol over him. The night was dark, but the child's merit caused the city deity to transform into a bull, standing before them. [391]

The bull had two horns, adorned with lamps of brilliant gems, which dispelled the darkness. [392]

As soon as the child's feet touched the ground, the city gate, which had been closed, opened. [393]

Ugrasena, seeing this from his prison, asked in astonishment, "Who is opening the gate at this time?" [394]

Balabhadra replied, "Be silent, this child will soon free you from your bonds." [395]

Ugrasena, pleased, said, "So be it." He blessed them. [396]

Vasudev and Balabhadra left and reached the banks of the Yamuna. The river, influenced by the future chakravarti, divided into two streams, making way for them. [397]

Who, being of the same caste, would not offer shelter and brotherhood? [398]

Vasudev and Balabhadra, crossing the Yamuna in wonder, went to Nanda's house. They saw Nanda returning with a baby girl. [399]

Seeing them, Nanda asked, "Bhadra, how did you come here at night? You are alone." [400]

Page #394:
---------------------------
366
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the wife of Nanda, desiring a son, worshipped the Bhut-Devatas with incense and other offerings. 
She then gave birth to a daughter, and in her grief, said to Nanda, "Take this daughter and give her to the Bhut-Devatas, I do not want her." 
Nanda, eager to fulfill his wife's wish, said, "My lord, I am going to give this daughter to the Bhut-Devatas." 
Hearing this, Baldev and Vasudev were pleased and said, "Our wish has been fulfilled." 
They then informed Nanda of everything, took his daughter, and gave him their son, saying, "Consider this child to be a future Chakravarti." 
They then secretly returned to the city, without anyone knowing. 
Nanda, taking the child home, said to his wife, "The Devatas, pleased with you, have given you this son, a great blessing." 
He then gave his wife the future Chakravarti. 
Kansa, hearing that Devaki had given birth to a daughter, went to her house and, upon arrival, flattened her nose and then had her raised in a mortar by a wet nurse. 
When she grew up, she saw her disfigured form and, in her grief, took initiation from the Suvrata Aryika and went to live on the Vindhya mountain. 
One day, the Vanavasi (forest dwellers) worshipped her as a deity and left. 
A tiger then devoured her, and she went to heaven. 
The next day, when the Vanavasi returned, they found only three of her fingers. 
The foolish people of the area worshipped these fingers with milk and other offerings. 
From that day forward, they believed that this Aryika was the Vindhyavasi Devi. 
Then, suddenly, great calamities began to occur in Mathura. 
Kansa, seeing these calamities, quickly called upon Varuna, a knower of omens, and asked him, "Tell me the truth, what is the result of these calamities?" 
The knower of omens replied, "Your great enemy has been born." 
At that time, the king of the earth, Mahinath, was in deep thought. 
The Devatas, seeking guidance, asked him, "What should we do?" 
Why is this happening to you? 
Nanda, bowing down, said, "My wife, who serves you, worshipped some Bhut-Devatas with incense and other offerings, desiring a son. 
Today, she has given birth to this daughter. 
Seeing the daughter, she was filled with grief and said to me, 'Take this daughter and give her to the Bhut-Devatas, I do not want her.' 
So, my lord, I am going to give this daughter to the Bhut-Devatas." 
Hearing this, Baldev and Vasudev said, "Our wish has been fulfilled." 
368-402
Thus, pleased, they informed Nanda of everything, took his daughter, and gave him their son, saying, "Consider this child to be a future Chakravarti." 
They then secretly returned to the city, without anyone knowing. 
403-404
Nanda, taking the child home, said to his wife, "The Devatas, pleased with you, have given you this son, a great blessing." 
He then gave his wife the future Chakravarti. 
Here, Kansa, hearing that Devaki had given birth to a daughter, went to her house and, upon arrival, flattened her nose and then had her raised in a mortar by a wet nurse. 
405-407
When she grew up, she saw her disfigured form and, in her grief, took initiation from the Suvrata Aryika and went to live on the Vindhya mountain. 
408
One day, the Vanavasi (forest dwellers) worshipped her as a deity and left. 
A tiger then devoured her, and she went to heaven. 
The next day, when the Vanavasi returned, they found only three of her fingers. 
The foolish people of the area worshipped these fingers with milk and other offerings. 
From that day forward, they believed that this Aryika was the Vindhyavasi Devi. 
406-411
Then, suddenly, great calamities began to occur in Mathura. 
Seeing these calamities, Kansa quickly called upon Varuna, a knower of omens, and asked him, "Tell me the truth, what is the result of these calamities?" 
The knower of omens replied, "Your great enemy has been born." 
412-413
The knower of omens
Bhan-lo. 2 Vanadasiṣu la.

Page #395:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

Kamsa, hearing this, was filled with anxiety. At that time, seven Vyantara Devas, who had attained Siddhi in their previous births, came and asked, "What task are we assigned?" ||414||

Kamsa said, "My enemy has been born. You must find him and kill that sinner." Saying this, he sent those seven Devas, and they, saying "So be it," departed. ||415||

Among those Devas, a Deva named Putana, knowing Krishna through her Vibhangavadhi knowledge, assumed the form of his mother and went to kill him. ||416||

Putana was extremely wicked and wanted to kill Krishna by feeding him milk from her breasts, which were filled with poison. While Putana was planning to kill Krishna, another Deva, who was always devoted to protecting the child Krishna, understood Putana's wickedness. When Putana was ready to feed Krishna milk, that other Deva caused intense pain in Putana's breasts. Unable to bear the pain, Putana cried out and fled. ||417-418||

After that, one day, a Deva, assuming the form of a chariot, ran towards the child Shri Krishna. Shri Krishna broke it with his two feet. ||419||

One day, Nanda Gop's wife tied the child Shri Krishna to a large mortar and went to fetch water. But Shri Krishna, dragging the mortar behind him, followed her. ||420||

At that time, two Devas, assuming the form of Arjuna trees, came to harm the child Shri Krishna. But he uprooted both trees from their roots. ||421||

One day, a Deva became a Tal tree. When the child Shri Krishna was walking, he reached beneath it. Another Deva, ready to drop fruits on his head, and another Deva, assuming the form of a donkey, was ready to bite him. Shri Krishna caught the donkey's foot and threw it against the Tal tree, destroying all three Devas. ||422-423||

Another day, a Deva, assuming the form of a horse, went to kill Krishna. But Krishna, in anger, broke its face. In this way, all seven Devas, unable to kill Krishna, went to Kamsa and said, "We are unable to kill your enemy." Saying this, they vanished like lightning. ||424-425||

Just as weapons, which show their power on others, become powerless against Indra's thunderbolt, so too, the powers of Devas, which show their power elsewhere, become powerless against a virtuous soul. ||426||

One day, a Deva named Arisht, assuming the form of a black bull, came to see Krishna's strength. But Krishna, ready to break his neck,

Page #396:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana
His mother tried to restrain him from these acts, saying, "O son, these are useless efforts that cause suffering to others." || 428 ||
Despite her efforts, he remained undeterred, his pride unyielding. He continued to perform these acts, for a great hero cannot be stopped from his path. || 429 ||
Hearing of his prowess, Devaki and Vasudeva, filled with curiosity, decided to visit him. They went to the Govardhan forest, under the guise of observing a fast called Gomukhi, accompanied by Balabhadra and other family members, showcasing their grandeur. || 430 || 431 ||
Upon reaching there, they saw Krishna, the mighty one, holding down the neck of a proud bull. Devaki and Balabhadra immediately greeted him with garlands and other offerings, adorning him with love and affection. Devaki circumambulated him. As she did so, milk flowed from her two breasts, resembling golden pots, showering Krishna's head, as if performing an abhisheka. || 432 || 433 ||
Seeing this, Balabhadra, fearing the consequences of breaking the fast, quickly said, "She has fainted from exhaustion due to the fast." He then poured water from pots filled with milk, showering her from all sides. Afterwards, Devaki, Vasudeva, and other prominent figures of Vraja were duly honored. Filled with joy, they fed Krishna with the Gopal boys and then partook in the meal themselves. They then returned to Mathurapuri. || 434 || 435 || 436 || 437 ||
Once, during a heavy downpour in Vraja, Hari lifted the mountain called Govardhan, providing shelter to the cows. || 438 ||
His fame, like moonlight, spread throughout the world, causing the lotus-like faces of his enemies to shrink. || 439 ||
Near the Jain temple, which was the reason for the establishment of Mathurapuri, in the temple of the guardian deity of the east, due to Krishna's abundant merit, a serpent bed, a bow, and a conch shell, these three jewels, appeared. They were protected by deities and signified the future prosperity of Krishna. || 440 || 441 ||
Seeing these, Kansa, the king of Mathura, was filled with fear. He asked Varuna, the astrologer, "What is the consequence of their appearance? Tell me." || 442 ||
Varuna replied, "O King! Whoever fulfills the prescribed rituals for these, will rule the kingdom with a wheel and enjoy prosperity." || 443 ||

Page #397:
---------------------------
-
The seventy-seventh chapter

366. Hearing those words, Kamsa himself tried to accomplish those three feats, but being unable to do so, he gave up the attempt, being overwhelmed by great fear. ||444||

To test who could accomplish this feat, the fearful Kamsa had a proclamation made in the city that whoever could ascend the serpent-bed, blow the conch with one hand, and string the bow with the other hand effortlessly, would be given his daughter in marriage. ||445-446||

Hearing this proclamation, many kings came to Mathurapuri. From the royal palace, Kamsa's brother-in-law, Svarbhanu, who was as radiant as the sun, was coming with his son, Bhanu, with great pomp and splendor. He wanted to stop at the bank of the lake in Godhavana, where large snakes resided, but when he learned from the cowherd boys that it was impossible to take water from this lake except by Krishna, he called Krishna to him and kept his army in place. ||447-450||

Seizing the opportunity, Krishna asked King Svarbhanu, "O King! Where are you going?" Then he told Krishna the whole purpose of going to Mathura. Hearing this, Krishna asked again, "Can people like us also do this feat?" Hearing Krishna's question, Svarbhanu thought, "This is not just a child, he seems to have great merit." With this thought, he replied to Krishna, "If you are capable of doing this feat, then come with us." Saying this, Svarbhanu took Krishna with him like his own son. Going to Mathura, they saw Kamsa as was proper, and then they also saw all those people who were trying to subdue the serpent-bed, etc., but whose pride was broken because they were unsuccessful. Shri Krishna stood near Bhanu and accomplished all three feats, and then, at the signal of Svarbhanu, he quickly returned to Vrindavan. ||451-455||

"This feat has been done by Bhanu," some guards told Kamsa, and some said, "This feat has not been done by Bhanu, but by some other young man." ||456||

Hearing this, King Kamsa said, "If this is so, then let that other young man be searched for. Whose son is he? What is his lineage? And where does he live? The girl will be given to him." ||457||

On the other hand, when Nandagopa was fully convinced that his son was capable of accomplishing this feat, he fled in fear with the cowherd community. ||458||

He will take the kingdom with the seven jewels of the wheel. ||143||

Kamsa tried to accomplish those three feats himself, but he was unable to do so and gave up the attempt, being overwhelmed by great fear. ||444||

Page #398:
---------------------------
370
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, a stone pillar stood at the entrance, and all the others had gone elsewhere. They were unable to move it together, and it was only Krishna who uprooted it. ||459|| The crowd was overjoyed and amazed by his courage. They worshipped him by offering him the best clothes and ornaments. ||460|| Seeing this, Nanda thought, "I have nothing to fear from anyone because of the power of this son." With this thought, he returned to his former place in Vrindavan. ||461|| The people who had gone to search, although they had been told clearly that the one who had performed the three tasks was Nanda's son, were still unsure. So, out of curiosity, he sent word to Nanda the next day, asking for the thousand-petaled lotus that the serpent king protects. ||462-464|| Hearing this, Nanda was overwhelmed with grief and said, "O King, you are supposed to protect your subjects, but alas, you have become a killer." ||462-464|| Thus, distressed, he said to Krishna, "My dear son, the king has given me this order. Go, you alone can bring the lotus that the fearsome serpents protect." Hearing his father's words, Krishna said, "What is difficult in this? I will bring it." Saying this, he quickly went towards the lake where the great serpents lived. ||465-466|| Without any hesitation, he entered the lake. Seeing him, the serpent king, who was as large as Yama, rose up ready to swallow him. At that time, the serpent king was blazing with anger, scattering sparks of blazing fire from his breath, his hood was terrifying with the brilliance of his jewel, his two tongues were flickering, and his sharp eyes were terrifying. Krishna thought, "This hood of his will be a pure stone for washing our clothes." With this thought, he took his saffron robe, soaked in water, and began to beat it against the serpent's hood, just as Garuda the bird beats his wings. The serpent king was terrified by the heavy blow of his clothes, which was like a thunderbolt, and disappeared due to the rise of his past good deeds. ||467-471|| After that, 
1 निश्चितैः ख. 2 कृष्णः ल । 3 तं ज्ञात्वा ख०, ग०। 4 स्फुटा ख०। 5 स्फुर-ल। 6 दृष्टिवानिव ल.(१)।

Page #399:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter
371
Knowing that the enemy was near Nanda Gopal, Kansa sent a message to Nanda Gopal, inviting him to watch a wrestling match. Nanda Gopal, along with Krishna and other wrestlers, went to Mathura. 473-474
As they entered the city, a wild elephant, freed from its bonds, charged towards Krishna. The elephant, resembling Yama, was attracted by the intoxicating scent of the elephant's musk, and many bees buzzed around its temples. It was like a disrespectful prince, unrestrained, and its tusks had destroyed the walls of many strong buildings. Seeing the terrifying elephant charging towards him, Krishna fearlessly pulled out one of its tusks and beat it with it. The elephant, terrified, fled. Krishna, pleased, said to the Gopas, "This is a clear sign of your victory!" He then encouraged the Gopas and entered Kansa's court. 475-477
King Vasudeva, knowing Kansa's intentions, had his army assembled and was waiting. Balarama, rising, clapped his hands and circled the arena with Krishna. He then told Krishna, "This is your time to kill Kansa." Then he left the arena. 478-481
Following Kansa's orders, many Gopala boys, disguised as wrestlers, entered the arena, striking their arms. The sound of the trumpets filled the air, and they moved in rhythm. They stood tall, proud, with their shoulders raised, sometimes moving their right eyebrow, sometimes their left. They roared, sometimes advancing, sometimes retreating, sometimes circling, sometimes dancing, sometimes leaping, sometimes standing still. They were adorned with dust and sweat, and their movements were beautiful to behold. 482-485

Page #400:
---------------------------
## 372
## Mahapurana, Uttarapurana

**Verse 486**
Chanura and other wrestlers, led by Kamsa, entered the arena, filled with the essence of valor, eager for the fight.

**Verse 487**
(Shardaulvikridita)
The valiant hero, Urmalla, stood in the center of the arena. He had already achieved victory in the wrestling match against the challenger. His brilliance shone brightly. Now, he was ready to fight the demons who had descended from heaven. Filled with the essence of valor, he thought to himself, "I will conquer them."

**Verse 488**
(Malini)
His body was naturally smooth, and his mind was skilled in various activities. He was adorned with thick ghee, his hair was tied, and he had no beard or mustache. He was always engaged in practice, free from impurities, and his victory was certain. He was revered by all for his valor.

**Verse 489**
His feet were steady, his bones were strong like the essence of a diamond, his chest was broad and hard, his body was tall and blue like the Nilgiri mountains. His eyes were bright and moving, his fists were tightly clenched, his arms were like clubs, and his waist was fit to be held in a fist. He was a manifestation of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas).

**Verse 490**
(Vasantatilaka)
His hands were fully developed, he was skilled in moving quickly, and he was as fierce as lightning. Standing in the arena, Nanda's son, Krishna, was causing unbearable fear to the lord of the dead (Yama).

**Verse 482-486**
They were filled with pride and seemed like incarnations of the heroic essence. At that time, Krishna stood in the arena, his mind was vast and generous, he was the foremost among the great wrestlers. His brilliance shone as if he had already won the wrestling match against the challenger. The essence of his valor was increasing, and he was filled with such enthusiasm that if the sun were to descend from the sky in the form of a wrestler, he would conquer it.

**Verse 487**
At that time, his chest was tightly bound, his hair was tied, he had no beard or mustache, his body was naturally smooth. He always practiced with the cowherd wrestlers, like a pure soul, and he always achieved complete victory. Everyone praised his valor.

**Verse 488**
His feet were steady, his bones were strong like the essence of a diamond, his arms were long and strong like a club, his waist was fit to be held in a fist, his chest was very hard and broad, he was like a large Nilgiri mountain, his body was a manifestation of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas), and no one could even look at him with pride.

**Verse 489**
His bright eyes were moving, he had clenched his fists tightly, his senses were fully developed, he was skilled in moving quickly, and he was very fierce like lightning. Thus, standing in the arena, Nanda's son, Krishna, was causing unbearable fear to the lord of the dead (Yama).

**Verse 490**
He seemed as if all the valor had taken form in him.

**1** (Prawritta)

Page #401:
---------------------------
## The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

373

He, with a lion-like form, roared like a lion, and leaped from the arena, crossing the sky as if it were a courtyard. || 491 || He descended from the sky like a thunderbolt upon the earth, his footfall shaking the joints of the mountains. He roared continuously, ran here and there, and brandished his arms, stained red with sindoor. || 492 || He was enraged, with yellow garments draped around his waist, and he was adorned with the victory of slaying the mighty wrestler, Chanur, who was as tall as a mountain peak, just as a lion is adorned after killing an elephant. || 493 || Seeing this, Kansa, whose eyes were fierce due to the blood flowing from them, himself entered the arena as a wrestler, driven by the hatred of past lives. Krishna, the embodiment of Yama, caught him by the foot with his hand, whirled him in the sky like a small bird, and then threw him down to the earth. || 494 || At that time, flowers rained from the sky, the drums of the gods resounded, and there was a great commotion in the army of Vasudeva. Balarama, the valiant hero, adorned with valor, victorious and without an enemy, stood in the arena, placing his younger brother Krishna, the unparalleled wrestler, in front of him, and attacked the opposing kings. || 495 || The invincible Balarama, whose strength was immeasurable, whose blows were like a torrent, whose feet were worthy of worship, and who was like a lion in his fury, was greeted with reverence by the crowds. He was the source of all joy, and he was the embodiment of the goddess of victory. || 496 || 

Thus, all the forces had gathered, or rather, all the forces had come together.

Page #402:
---------------------------
374
Mahapuraana, Uttarapuraana, Vasantatilaka
Dooteeva me shritavatee varaveeralakshmi

Retasya dakshinabhujam vijayakaikageham.
Praaptam patim chirataraditi tam kataakshai
Raikhisht raagataralaibharatardhalakshmi: || 497 ||
Ityaarṣe Bhagavadgunabhadraacharyapranīte Triṣaṣṭilakṣaṇamahāpuraṇasangrahe Nemisvāmicarite Kṛṣṇavijayo nāma saptatittamaṁ parva || 70 ||
+0:8:0+
Like a lion enraged by the attack of maddened elephants, whose valor is praiseworthy, whose captives are singing his praises, and who has brought joy to all, Veerlakshmi suddenly reached Shri Krishna. || 466 ||
Like my messenger, the great Veerlakshmi has attained his victorious right arm, therefore the Lakshmi of half the Bharat region was looking at her husband Shri Krishna, who had been obtained for a long time, with amorous glances. || 467 ||
Thus ends the seventieth chapter, describing the victory of Shri Krishna, in the Neminaath Swami Charit, part of the Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpuraṇasangraha, composed by the sage Bhagavadgunabhadraacharya. || 70 ||
4++++

Page #403:
---------------------------
The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

Then, the tears shed by Kansa's wives were drunk by the earth, and from all sides, festive sprouts emerged from the earth-tree. ||1|| This valiant, virtuous son of King Vasudeva, had grown up in Vrindavan, hidden from the fear of Kansa. His growth was not only for the benefit of his own side, but also for the growth of the entire world, like the gradual growth of the moon. ||2-3|| Thus, praised by the citizens and the people of the country, the great king Ugrasena, who had freed himself from bondage, bid farewell to Nanda and the other cowherds with great wealth and honor. Having entered the city of Shouryapur with his brothers, Krishna's time passed happily. One day, Kansa's queen, Jivadyasha, grieving over the death of her husband, went to Jarasandha. She told him everything that had happened in Mathura. ||4-6|| Hearing this, Jarasandha, in a fit of rage, ordered his sons to attack the Yadavas. ||7|| They, having assembled their army, went and fought in the battlefield, but were defeated. This is natural, for who does not face defeat when fate wills it? ||8|| This time, Jarasandha, in anger, sent his invincible son, Aparajit, because he considered him to be a worthy name and a Yama to his enemies. ||9|| With a large army of three hundred and forty-six thousand, Aparajit fought for a long time, but due to the depletion of his merit, he was also defeated. ||10|| Then, his son, the valiant Kalayavana, determined to fulfill his father's command, set out to conquer the Yadavas. ||11|| Hearing of Kalayavana's approach, the Yadavas, fearing for their lives, abandoned their three cities: Shouryapur, Hastinapur, and Mathura. ||12|| Kalayavana pursued them. On the way, the Yadavas' family deity, having gathered a lot of fuel and kindled a high-flaming fire, took the form of an old woman and sat on the path. Seeing her, young Kalayavana asked her, "What is this?" She replied, "Listen, O king..." ||13-14||

Page #404:
---------------------------
376
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, all my sons were consumed by the blazing fire. They perished with the Yadavas due to fear. ||15|| Hearing these words, Kalayavana, the enemy, entered the blazing fire, which was like my prowess. ||16|| Returning quickly, he carried a false pride and went to his father. The Acharya says, "Shame on this thoughtless act." ||17|| Meanwhile, the army of Yadavas stopped by the shore of the ocean to establish their place. ||18|| There, Krishna, with pure intentions, sat on a bed of darbha grass, performed the rituals and chanted mantras, observing a fast for eight days. At that time, a god named Naigama said, "I will take the form of a horse. Mount me and go into the ocean. There, a city will be built for you within twelve yojanas." Hearing the words of Naigama, Krishna, with certainty, did the same. It is right, for who is not a friend when there is virtue? ||16-21|| The horse, which is swift and proud, on which Krishna is seated, and whose fly whisks are still, when it ran, it seemed as if the ocean was divided into two parts due to the fear of Krishna. It is right, for the group of water (foolish people) can be divided by those who are endowed with intellect and power. ||22-23|| At that time, by the order of Indra, Kubera, with the virtue of Krishna and the promising Neminath Tirthankara, created a beautiful city. First, he built a magnificent Jain temple, shining with a thousand peaks, and then a beautiful city adorned with vpra, moat, rampart, gate, and hall, etc. The ocean embraced the gate of the city with its large waves. The city, with its brilliance, laughed like a divine city, and its name was Dwaravati. ||24-27|| Krishna, with his father Vasudeva and elder brother Balarama, entered the city and lived happily with the Yadavas. ||28||
Then, the one who will become the lord of the three worlds, the soul of Indra, will come from the chariot...
1. Then Lo. 2. Jinālaya Lo. 3. Dwaravati Lo.

Page #405:
---------------------------
Ekasaptatimaṃ parva
Rājñaḥ kāśyapagotrasyaharivamśaśikhāmaṇeḥ | Samudravijayākhyasya śivadeví manoramā ||30|| Devatopāsyamānānirvasudharābhinandità | Ṣaṇmāsāvasitau māse kārtike śuklapakṣage ||31|| Ṣaṣṭhyāmathottarāṣāḍhe niśānte svamamālikām | Ālokitānuvaktrābjaṃ praviṣṭaśca gajādhipam ||32|| Tato vandivacoyāmabherīdhvanivibodhità | Kṛtamaṅgalasunānā dhṛtapuṇyaprasādhana ||33|| Upacāravadabhyetya nṛpamarddhāsane sthità | Svadṛṣṭasvapnasāphaly'manvayuktaśrutāgamam ||34|| Saṃkalayya narendro'pi phalaṃ teṣāmabhāṣata | Tvagarbhe viśvalokéśo'vatīrṇa iti sūkṣmadhīḥ ||35|| Śrutvā tadaiva taṃ ulabdhavativātūṣadapyasau | Jñātvā svacihnadevéndrāḥ sambhūyāgatya saṃmadāt ||36|| Svargāvatārakalyāṇamahōtsavavidhāyinaḥ | Svéṣāṃ puṇyañca nirvartya svaddhāma samupāgaman ||37|| Sa punaḥ śrāvaṇe śuklapakṣe ṣaṣṭhīdine jinaḥ | Jñānatritayabhṛtvaṣṭyoge tuṣṭhyāmajāyata ||38|| Atha svaviṣṭarākampsamutpannāvadhīkṣaṇāḥ | Buddhvā bhagavadutpattiṃ saudharmendrapuraskṣarāḥ ||39|| Sātasammdadāḥ prāpya parivéṣṭya puraṃ sthitāḥ | Airāvatagazaskandhamāropya bhuvanaprabhuṃ ||40|| Saudharmādhipatirabhaktathā nīlāmbhojadaladyutiṃ | Īśamīśānakalpéśaratātapanivāraṇam ||41|| Namañcamaravairocanoddhatacamarīruham | Dhanéśanimitadhāmaṇisopānamārgagaḥ ||42|| Nītvā payodamārgéṇa girīśéśānadigigate | Pāṇḍukākhyaśilāprasthammaṇisiṃhāsane ||43|| Anādiniddhane bālamāropyātyarkatejasam | Kṣīrāmbhodhipayaḥ pūrṇasuvarṇakalasocitaiḥ ||44||

Page #406:
---------------------------
378
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, with eight thousand and eight hundred verses, the infinite and radiant (Amit Prabha) Kalasas, filled with the water of the ocean, were presented to the Lord by the gods, one after another, from hand to hand. 45
Then, after being anointed and adorned as desired, he was named Neminaath, the Nem of the wheel of true Dharma. 16
Then, the Lord, the bearer of the great glory, adorned with a crown, was brought from Mount Meru by the Indra and given to his parents, and he performed a play called Ananda Nataka, with many arms, full of rasa and bhava. 47
After this, the Indra, along with the other gods, returned to his own abode. 48
After the lineage of the Tirthankara Naminath, after five hundred thousand years, the Jina Neminaath was born. 19
His lifespan was a thousand years, his height was ten bows, his body was well-formed and strong, the lords of the three worlds worshipped him, and liberation was near to him. 50
He enjoyed divine pleasures for a long time in the city of Dwaravati. 51
Thus, while he was enjoying himself, a great deal of time passed, like a moment. 52
One day, some merchants' sons from Magadha, who were engaged in trade by water, lost their way due to good fortune and arrived in the city of Dwaravati. 52
Seeing the royal play and the glory of the city, they were amazed. 53
They bought many precious jewels from the city and, after going to Rajagriha, they presented them to their master and went to see the king Jarasandha, the bearer of the wheel jewel. 54
The king honored them and asked them, "O merchants' sons, where did you get this collection of jewels? It seems as if it has opened its eyes with its rising rays, out of curiosity." 55
They replied, "O King, listen, we have seen a great wonder, the like of which we have never seen before. In the middle of the ocean, there is a city called Dwaravati, which seems to have emerged from the netherworld and come to earth. There are large buildings made of lime, densely packed, so that it seems as if the foam of the ocean has taken the form of a city. It is impregnable to enemies, so it seems as if it is the second treasure of the Bharata Chakravarti. It is the best of all cities because it is the cause of the birth of Lord Neminaath." 56-59
1. Panchalaksha: Sama: Lo. 2. Vilokya Avibhuti: Lo.

Page #407:
---------------------------
The seventy-first chapter

376

No one can harm it, it is devoid of beggars, many flags flutter on its palaces, it seems as if 'this group of clouds of the autumn season resides above me'. Due to this envy, it seems as if it is trying to remove the clouds of the autumn season, which are high in the sky, with many arms in the form of fluttering flags on the front of the palaces. It is a city just like the water of the ocean, because just as there are many gems in the water of the ocean, so too are there many gems in that city, just as the water of the ocean is adorned with black brilliance, that is, black color, so too is that city adorned with black brilliance, that is, the glory of Vasudeva's son, Shri Krishna, and just as there is always a deep sound in the water of the ocean, so too is there always a deep sound in that city. It is nine yojanas wide and twelve yojanas long, it is in the middle of the ocean and is called the city of the Yadavas. We obtained these gems there. Thus said the sons of the Vaishyas. || 57-64 ||

When the arrogant Jarasandha, who was deceived by fate, heard the words of the sons of the Vaishyas, he became blind with anger, his vision became terrifying, and not only that, he also became blind with intellect. || 65 ||

His army, like the surging sea of the time of destruction that appears untimely, is fickle, so he, Jarasandha, immediately set out to destroy the Yadavas. || 66 ||

When Narada, who loved war without reason, came to know of this, he quickly went to Shri Krishna and informed him of Jarasandha's anger. || 67 ||

'The enemy is coming.' Hearing this news, Shri Krishna was not troubled at all. He went to Nemikumara and said, 'You protect this city. I have heard that the king of Magadha, Jarasandha, wants to conquer us, so I will quickly destroy him, like a decayed tree eaten by worms, with your influence.' Hearing Shri Krishna's heroic words, Lord Neminath, whose mind was filled with joy, who was smiling slightly, and whose eyes were filled with sweetness, had the knowledge of the future, so he decided that our victory over the opponents would be certain. He revealed the brilliance of his teeth and said, 'Shrom.' That is, he accepted the rule of Dwaravati. Just as a Jain, by the means of the other-than-non-existence characteristic, decides his own opinion, so too did Shri Krishna decide his own victory by the smile of Lord Neminath. || 68-72 ||

1. Asanhatatadanasa (4). 2. Bhumi-lo. 3. Krodadandhibhuto la.

Page #408:
---------------------------
380
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraana
Then Krishna and Balarama, to conquer the enemies, with Jaya, Vijaya, Saaran, Angada, Dava, Uddhava, Sumukha, Padma, Jara, Sudrishti, the five Pandavas, Satyaki, Drupada, all the Yadavas, Virat, Dhristarjuna with an immeasurable army, Ugrasena, Chamar who desired war, Vidura and other kings, became excited and ready for war, and from there they went to Kurukshetra. ||73-76||
Jarasandha, who desired war, also arrived in front of Krishna with Bhishma, who was showing his anger (ego), Drona, Karna, Ashwatthama, Rukma, Shalya, Vrishasena, Kripa, Kripavarma, Rudhira, Indrasena, King Jayadratha, Hemprabha, the lord of the earth Duryodhana, Dushasana, Durmarshana, Durdharshana, Durjaya, King Kalinga, Bhagadatta, and many other kings. ||77-80||
At that time, the war drums were beating in Krishna's army, and just as the Kusumbha color dyes the cloth, so the sound of those drums rising up colored the hearts of the warriors. ||81||
Hearing those drums, some kings began to worship the gods, and some went to the gurus and took vows of non-violence, etc. ||82||
In front of the battle, some kings were saying to their servants, "You people wear armor, take sharp swords, string your bows, and prepare the elephants. Saddle the horses and get them ready, hand over the women to the officers, yoke the horses to the chariots, continuously consume the objects of enjoyment and enjoyment, and let the prisoners and Magadha people praise your valor." ||83-86||
At that time, some kings were ready to die for their lives, some out of devotion to their master, some out of natural valor, some out of jealousy for their enemies, some out of desire to gain fame, some out of greed to attain the state of heroes, some out of pride in their lineage, and some for other reasons related to war. ||87-88||
At that time, Shri Krishna was also very proud, wearing all ornaments and with saffron applied to his body, so that he looked like an elephant with vermilion applied to it. ||89||
"Victory to you," "May you live long,"
1 Amunchataashu Lo. 2 Gajaashritaah Lo.

Page #409:
---------------------------
(The Seventy-First Parva
381
They performed ablutions with the water from the golden pitcher held by the noble ones, offered water libations with pure water, and then, with incense, flowers, etc., worshipped the Lord Jinendra, the destroyer of obstacles, the masterless one, the wish-fulfilling Kalpa tree, and paid their respects to him. Surrounded by their gurus and chieftains, they marched forth to confront the enemy, determined to destroy him. 
11-13
Then, following Krishna's instructions, the devoted attendants of the noble ones arranged the army in accordance with the prescribed formation. 
14
Jarasandha, too, stationed himself in the middle of the battlefield and, with the help of his fierce commanders, organized his army. 
15
As the armies were thus arrayed, the war drums sounded, and the sky was filled with the arrows shot by valiant archers, obscuring the rays of the sun. Fearful of the setting sun, the male and female swans, separated by the darkness, cried out in distress. Other birds, too, flew to their nests, uttering cries of alarm. The battlefield was so dark that the warriors could not see each other. But soon, the darkness was dispelled by the flames that erupted from the tusks of the enraged, intoxicated elephants, and the warriors, skilled in the use of all weapons, resumed the battle. In a moment, the valiant warriors, filled with the nectar of valor, turned the battlefield into a river of blood. 
16-20
Horses, their forelegs severed by the sharp edges of fearsome swords, were reduced to the state of those ascetics who abandon their austerities. 
101
Elephants, their legs cut off, fell to the ground like huge, blue mountains uprooted by the mighty winds of the apocalypse. 
102
The faces of the fallen warriors, praised by their enemies for their valiant deeds, shone with the beauty of lotus flowers blooming on the earth. 
103
The warriors, with their skill, broke each other's weapons, and many were killed by the fragments of those broken weapons. 
104
Thus, the prisoners of war chanted their auspicious hymns, their voices sounding like the sweet notes of cuckoos amidst the fresh clouds. 
60
They performed ablutions with the water from the golden pitcher held by the noble ones, offered water libations with pure water, and then, with incense, flowers, etc., worshipped the Lord Jinendra, the destroyer of obstacles, the masterless one, the wish-fulfilling Kalpa tree, and paid their respects to him. Surrounded by their gurus and chieftains, they marched forth to confront the enemy, determined to destroy him. 
61-63
Then, following Krishna's instructions, the devoted attendants of the noble ones arranged the army in accordance with the prescribed formation. 
14
Jarasandha, too, stationed himself in the middle of the battlefield and, with the help of his fierce commanders, organized his army. 
15
As the armies were thus arrayed, the war drums sounded, and the sky was filled with the arrows shot by valiant archers, obscuring the rays of the sun. Fearful of the setting sun, the male and female swans, separated by the darkness, cried out in distress. Other birds, too, flew to their nests, uttering cries of alarm. The battlefield was so dark that the warriors could not see each other. But soon, the darkness was dispelled by the flames that erupted from the tusks of the enraged, intoxicated elephants, and the warriors, skilled in the use of all weapons, resumed the battle. In a moment, the valiant warriors, filled with the nectar of valor, turned the battlefield into a river of blood. 
16-20
Horses, their forelegs severed by the sharp edges of fearsome swords, were reduced to the state of those ascetics who abandon their austerities. 
101
Elephants, their legs cut off, fell to the ground like huge, blue mountains uprooted by the mighty winds of the apocalypse. 
102
The faces of the fallen warriors, praised by their enemies for their valiant deeds, shone with the beauty of lotus flowers blooming on the earth. 
103
The warriors, with their skill, broke each other's weapons, and many were killed by the fragments of those broken weapons. 
104
)

Page #410:
---------------------------
382
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, some warriors fought not out of envy, anger, fame, or desire for fruit, but only because they believed it was righteous. 1.5. Many valiant warriors, whose bodies were torn apart by all kinds of weapons, fell beneath the shoulders of elephants, but their feet were caught in the ornaments of their ears, so they hung there, as if they were unwilling to leave their familiar place, and so they hung down, their faces turned downwards, supported by the tips of their ears. 106-107. Many agile warriors, holding shields in their left hands, were killing their enemies with their right arms, which were armed with weapons. 108. It is said that the battlefield was the place where the greatest number of humans died, as described in the scriptures as the "Kadali Ghat" (sudden death). 109. Thus, the fierce battle raged for a long time, and even Yama, the god of death, was satisfied. 110. Just as the water of a small river is overwhelmed by the flow of a great river, so too was the army of Vishnu overwhelmed by the army of his enemies. 111. Seeing this, Hari, the lion of the Karins, became enraged and, along with the multitude of his vassal kings, prepared to kill the enemy. 112. Just as darkness disappears with the rising of the sun, so too did the enemy army disappear at the sight of Krishna. Seeing this, Jarasandha, filled with anger, looked at Krishna with a harsh gaze and, with his might, hurled his chakra, which illuminated all directions, towards Krishna. 113-114. But the chakra circled around Krishna and came to rest on his right arm. Then, Krishna took the chakra and severed the head of Jarasandha, the king of Magadha. 115. At that moment, the drums of victory sounded in Krishna's army, and flowers from the celestial trees rained down from the sky, along with fragrant drops of water. 116. Krishna, the Chakravarti, with a great desire for conquest, set out with his brother Balarama and his army, with the chakra in front of him. 117. Krishna, whose rise was powerful, conquered the famous gods, including Magadha, and made them his servants, and he accepted the precious jewels they offered him. 118. He marched forward, his feet bearing the weight of the earth, through the valleys between the oceans, the rivers, the mountains, and the forests. 119.

Page #411:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Chapter
383
Having subdued the Mlechcha kings, the Sankhecharas, who were situated in the midst of the Khecharachala mountain range and the Ganga river, and having made them subservient, the Lord of half of Bharatavarsha, Krishna, entered the city of Dwaravati, which was adorned with high flags and decorated with arches, with great joy. 
Upon his entry, the lords of the gods and the Vidyadharas, recognizing him as the Chakravarti, the ruler of the three realms, crowned him without any ceremony. 
Krishna, with a lifespan of a thousand years, stood tall as ten bows, his complexion was like a blooming blue lotus, and his body was embraced by Lakshmi. 
The Chakra, Shakti, Gada, Shankha, Dhanush, Danda, and Nandaka sword were his seven jewels, all guarded by the gods. 
The Ratna Mala, Gada, Hal, and Musala were the four radiant jewels of Balarama. 
Rukmini, Satyabhama, Sati Jambavati, Susima, Lakshmana, Gandhari, Gauri, and Priya Padmavati were the eight queens of Krishna. He had sixteen thousand queens in total, while Balarama had eight thousand queens who granted all desired happiness. Both brothers enjoyed divine pleasures with their queens, experiencing supreme joy. 
Thus, Krishna, enjoying abundant pleasures due to the fruition of his past virtuous deeds, spent his time happily. 
One day, during the autumn season, all the ladies of the inner palace were engaged in playful water sports in the Manohara lake. During this time, a witty and charming conversation took place between Lord Nemishita and Satyabhama while they were splashing water. 
Satyabhama asked, "Why do you play with your beloved in the same way you play with me?" 
Nemishita replied, "Are you not my beloved?" 
Satyabhama said, "If I am your beloved, then where will your brother (Krishna) go?" 
Nemishita answered, "He will go to a beautiful woman." 
Satyabhama asked, "Tell me, who is that beautiful woman?" 
Nemishita replied, "Don't you know? Well, now you will." 
Satyabhama said, "

Page #412:
---------------------------
384
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, after the pleasure of bathing, she said to him, "O you with eyes like blue lotuses, please take this bathing cloth." 
134
He said, "What should I do with this? Wash it, Haribhavan. You are not Krishna, who, resting on the serpent bed, effortlessly mounted the divine bow called Shanga, and filled the entire space with the sound of the conch. Do you have that courage? If not, why are you asking me to wash the cloth?" 
135-136
Nemnath said, "I will do this task properly," and driven by pride, he went towards the city. He entered the armory and, standing on the serpent bed, which shone with the brilliance of great jewels, he mounted it as if it were his own bed. He then mounted the bow, whose string, due to repeated stretching, made a loud sound, and blew the conch that filled the entire space. 
137-139
At that time, he considered his own elevated state. Even a trace of attachment and ego inevitably leads to corruption. 
140
Hearing this wondrous deed, Hari, who was in the assembly hall called Kusumachitra, became agitated and his mind was filled with anxiety. 
141
With great astonishment, he asked his servants, "What is this?" They investigated the matter thoroughly and informed Krishna. 
142
Hearing their words, the Chakravarti Krishna, with great care, pondered, "It is amazing, after a long time, the mind of Kumar Nemnath has become filled with attachment. Now that he has attained youth, he is fit for marriage. He should be married. It is true, what mortal is not hindered by the evil of lust?" 
143-144
Thinking this, he said, "To increase the ocean of the Ugravansha, there is Rajimati, the daughter of King Ugrasen, born from the queen Jayavati, who is beautiful in every way." 
145
After considering this, he went to King Ugrasen's house and, with great respect, requested the honorable daughter, saying, "May your daughter become the beloved of Nemikumar, the lord of the three worlds." 
146
In response, King Ugrasen said, "O Dev! You are the master of the jewels born in the three realms, and especially our master. Who are we to fulfill this request?" 
147
You all call him straightforward, but he is very cunning.

Page #413:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Parva
385
The Yadava king, Ugrasena, said, "On an auspicious day, let us begin the celebration of this festival." || 144 || He ordered a beautiful five-layered pavilion to be built, with a platform in the middle. || 149 || It was adorned with garlands of fresh pearls, fragrant flowers, and beautiful new fabrics, and in the center was a golden throne. || 150 || On this throne, the bridegroom, Nemikumar, sat with the bride, Rajimati, performing the ritual of stepping on wet rice. || 151 || The next day was the time for the water-pouring ceremony. On that day, the mind of Madhava, the best of the deceivers, who desired to know the path of liberation, became tainted by the intense rise of the passion of greed. || 152 || He feared that the Lord Neminath, who was worshipped by Indra, might take away his kingdom. || 153 || At that moment, he thought that Nemikumar might become detached from worldly pleasures due to some reason for renunciation. || 154 || With this thought, he began to devise a way to create a cause for renunciation. || 155 || He had a group of many deer brought in by the chief hunters and gathered them in one place, surrounding them with a fence. || 156 || He told the guards who were stationed there, "If Lord Nemikumar comes to observe the directions and asks about these deer, you should tell him clearly that the Chakravarti has brought this group of deer to be killed for his wedding." || 157 || Thus, Krishna, who was stained with great sin, gave this order to those people. || 158 || Then, Nemikumar, who was radiant with various ornaments, with his hair adorned, and decorated with a garland of red lotuses, his face smeared with dust kicked up by the hooves of horses, surrounded by sons of great kings of equal status, who were extremely happy, || 159 || mounted a beautiful palanquin and set out to observe the directions. || 160 || There, he saw the deer running here and there, thirsty, with pitiful eyes, and filled with fear, crying out in a loud, sorrowful voice. || 161 || Moved with compassion, he asked the guards there, "Why are these grass-eating creatures confined here?" || 162 ||

Page #414:
---------------------------
286
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the gods, led by Vasudeva, said to him, "We have brought these animals here to be used for your wedding celebration." || 163 || Hearing this, Lord Nemnath thought, "These animals live in the forest, eat grass, and never harm anyone. Yet, people inflict pain on them for their own enjoyment. Shame on such people! Or, what do these fools, whose minds are filled with deep falsehood, not do? They are cruel, devoid of compassion, and kill living beings with their own mortal lives. Look, the wicked Krishna has deceived me by creating fear in my mind about his taking over the kingdom. In reality, the actions of wicked people are always harmful." Thinking this, he became detached and returned to his home. || 164-168 || With the appearance of the Ratna Tray, the Lokantic Devas came and explained to him, and remembering his past lives, he trembled with fear. At that time, he performed the Diksha Kalyanak celebration. || 166-168 || After that, he boarded a palanquin called Devakuru and set off with the gods. He went to Sahasramravan and took the Tela vow. On the sixth day of the bright fortnight of Shravan, in the evening, after three hundred years of the Burmar-kal had passed, he took the vow of Sannyam along with a thousand kings. At that time, he attained the fourth stage of knowledge, Manahparyaya, and the Kevalgyan was about to happen soon. || 166-172 || Just as the evening sun follows the setting sun, Rajimati also followed him for penance. This is right, because even a single word, let alone the body, is the same justice for women of the family. || 172 || Other people are not known to be detached even from their own suffering, but those who are virtuous men abandon even great wealth because of the suffering of others. || 173 || Baldev, Narayana, and other chief kings, and Indra and other gods, all praised the Lord with many hymns and went to their respective places. || 174 || On the day of Parana, the Lord, the best of the virtuous, entered the city of Dwaravati. There, King Varadat, who was as radiant as gold and possessed the qualities of faith, etc., offered him pure food, fit for the acceptance of the munis, with nine types of devotion, including Padigahan, and he received the Pancha-Ascharya. || 175-176 || In his house, there were twelve crore and a half jewels, which were left by the gods. He also had rain, auspiciousness, wind, and the three qualities of goodness, passion, and darkness. || 177 ||

Page #415:
---------------------------
The 71st Chapter

A beautiful sound of drums, struck by the gods hidden within the clouds, echoed through the air, accompanied by the announcement of a great donation. || 178 ||

Thus, while engaged in penance, after fifty-six days of his concealed state, he arrived at the mountain called Raivatak (Girnar) on a day in the dark fortnight of Ashwin, under a large, heavy bamboo tree. || 179 ||

On the day of the Citra constellation, in the morning of the bright fortnight of Ashwin, while he was in the state of fasting, he attained omniscience, encompassing all things. || 180 ||

The gods celebrated the festival of omniscience and worshipped him. || 181 ||

In his assembly were eleven Ganadharas, led by Varadatta, four hundred Shrutagnas, masters of the ocean of knowledge, eleven thousand eight hundred teachers, fifteen hundred holders of the three knowledges, the same number of Kevala-gnanis, eleven hundred holders of Vikriya-ridhi, nine hundred Manah-paryaya-gnanis, and eight hundred debaters. || 182-184 ||

Thus, in total, there were eighteen thousand Muni-rajas in his assembly. There were forty thousand Aryikas, including Yakshi, Rajimati, Katyayani, and others, one hundred thousand Shravakas, three hundred thousand Shravikas, countless gods and goddesses, and a number of Tiryanchas. || 185-187 ||

Surrounded by these twelve assemblies, Lord Nemnath, the destroyer of sins, spread the rays of the sun of Dharma-upadesha, repeatedly causing the lotus of the auspicious beings to bloom. || 188 ||

Having traversed all the lands, he finally reached the city of Dvaravati and resided in the garden of the Raivatak mountain. || 189 ||

When Krishna and Baldeva heard this news, they went to him with all their powers. There, they paid their respects, listened to the nature of Dharma, and felt joy. || 190 ||

Then, Krishna said, "O Bhagavan! Some say that there is no such thing as a Jiva, some consider it eternal, some consider it momentary, some consider it subtler than an atom, some consider it equal to a grain of Shamak, some consider it the size of a thumb, some consider it five hundred yojanas, some consider it as vast as the sky, some consider it one, some consider it many, some consider it unknowable, and some consider it otherwise. There is doubt about this Jiva, O Lord." || 191-193 ||

Page #416:
---------------------------
388
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Sri Krishna asked, "Even in these, there is no characteristic of the soul. Is it subtle, endowed with qualities, and a consumer of its own actions, arising and perishing with the body?" 19
"It is known, it is equal to the body, it is self-aware, it is aware of happiness and other things, it is bound by karma since beginningless time, and it wanders in the four states of existence." 195
"If it is a worthy soul, it attains the eight qualities of liberation, having obtained the means of liberation, such as time, and having destroyed the eight karmas. It becomes equal to the ultimate body." 196
"It resides above the three worlds, because its nature is to ascend." 197
"Thus, the Lord of the world, Neminath, spoke about the true nature of the soul." 197
"All the worthy souls agreed, saying, 'It is so.' But the unworthy and the distant-worthy, being tainted by the rise of false belief, could not abandon their beginningless desires, which increase worldly existence." 198
"Devaki then asked the venerable Varadatta Ganadhara, 'O Lord, two by two, six monks came to my house for alms. I felt affection for all six of them as if they were my own family. What is the reason for this?'" 199
"Thus, the Ganadhara began to tell the story as follows: In the city of Mathura, in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa, there lived a king named Shurasen, the ruler of the Shourya country. In that same city, there were seven sons of the merchant Bhanudatta. Their mother's name was Yamunadatta. Among the seven sons, Subhanu was the eldest, followed by Bhanukirti, then Bhanushur, then Shuradev, then Shuradatta, and finally Shurasen. Both parents were adorned by these seven sons, and they attained the householder dharma due to the fruits of their virtuous deeds." 201-204
"One day, having heard about the nature of dharma from the Acharya Abhayanandi, both King Shurasen and the merchant Bhanudatta adopted excellent restraint. Similarly, the merchant's wife, Yamunadatta, took initiation from an Aryika named Jindatta." 205-206
"After the departure of their parents, the merchant's seven sons became attached to the seven vices. They fell into sin, lost all their wealth, and were banished from their country by the king." 207
1. Guṇī la. 2. Agrahīvāśul.

Page #417:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Parva
386
Having reached the vast cremation ground of Avanti, they left Shurasen there and the rest entered the city to steal. || 208 || While they were engaged in this, another incident occurred. The king of that city was Vrishabhadhwaja. || 209 || He had a valiant and skilled warrior named Dridhaprahara, who had a thousand soldiers. His wife was Vaprasri and their son was Vajramusti. || 210 || Vimala, the daughter of Vimala-Indu, was born in that city. She was the beloved of Vajramusti. || 211 || One day, all of them were ready to go to the forest to enjoy the spring season. Vaprasri, with a malicious intent, put a black snake in the pot along with the garlands. || 212 || There is no work that women cannot do. Manghi, eager to get the garlands, put her hand in the pot. || 213 || She was bitten by the venomous snake of the spring season. Her whole body was filled with poison and she became motionless. || 214 || Vaprasri wrapped her in straw and left her in the cremation ground. When Vajramusti returned from his forest games, he asked his mother where Manghi was. His mother gave him a false answer, but he was not satisfied. || 215 || He was very sad because he could not find Manghi. He took his sharp sword and went out to search for her at night. || 216 || At that time, a sage named Vardharma was sitting in the cremation ground in a state of yoga. Vajramusti bowed to him with devotion and said, "O venerable one, if I can see my beloved, I will worship you with lotus flowers with a thousand petals." He made this vow and went ahead. || 217 || He saw his beloved, who was slightly conscious and poisoned. He quickly removed the straw and brought her to the sage. || 218 || The sage, by the touch of his feet, cured her of the poison. She got up and brought joy to her husband. || 220 || Vajramusti, whose mind was pleased with the sage, went to get the lotus flowers. Shurasen, who was hiding behind the trees, saw all this. || 221 || He went to Manghi to test her, showing himself and speaking sweetly. || 222 || 
|| 207 || Now they reached the Avanti country and entered the city to steal, leaving Shurasen in the cremation ground of Ujjayini. || 208 || After the six brothers left, another incident occurred in that cremation ground. At that time, the king of Ujjayini was Vrishabhadhwaja. He had a valiant and skilled warrior named Dridhaprahara, who had a thousand soldiers. His wife was Vaprasri and their son was Vajramusti. || 206-210 || In the same city, Manghi, the daughter of Vimala, born to Vimala-Indu, was the beloved of Vajramusti. || 211 || One day, all of them were ready to go to the forest to enjoy the spring season. Manghi was also ready to go. She put her hand in the pot for garlands, but her mother-in-law, Vaprasri, had already put a black snake in the pot along with the garlands, out of jealousy for her daughter-in-law. It is true, because what is there that women cannot do? || 211-213 || The venomous snake of the spring season bit Manghi as soon as she put her hand in the pot. Her whole body was filled with poison and she became motionless at that moment. || 214 || Vaprasri wrapped her daughter-in-law in straw and left her in the cremation ground. When Vajramusti returned from his forest games, he asked his mother where Manghi was. His mother gave him a false answer, but he was not satisfied. He was very sad because he could not find Manghi. He took his sharp sword and went out to search for her at night. || 215-216 || At that time, a sage named Vardharma was sitting in the cremation ground in a state of yoga. Vajramusti bowed to him with devotion and said, "O venerable one, if I can see my beloved, I will worship you with lotus flowers with a thousand petals." He made this vow and went ahead. || 217 || He saw his beloved, who was slightly conscious and poisoned. He quickly removed the straw and brought her to the sage. || 218 || The sage, by the touch of his feet, cured her of the poison. Manghi got up and brought joy to her husband. || 220 || After that, Vajramusti, whose mind was very pleased with the sage, went to get the lotus flowers. Shurasen, who was hiding behind the trees, saw all this. || 221 || He went to Manghi to test her, showing himself and speaking sweetly. || 222 ||

Page #418:
---------------------------
360
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraanam
Lilaavaloakanai Siyadhadvisambhanam Bhrisham. Saapyah Bhavatha Sardhamaagamisyaami Maam Bhavan. || 223 || Grihivaa Yaatviti Vyaktum Shruthvaa Tatvatpate Rahm. Bibhemi Tan Na Vaktavyamiti Tenabhilaashita. || 224 || Ma Bhaishistvaam Varaako'sau Kim Karishyati Bhiluka. Tato Yena Tavaapaayo Na Syatkriyate Maya. || 225 || Ityanyonyakathaakale Hastaneetasarooruhah. Vajramushti Samgaaty Karavaalam Priyaakare. || 226 || Nidhaaya Munipadaabjadvayam Abhyarchya Bhaktita. Aanam Priya Tasy Prahartamaasimuddadhe. || 227 || Karena Shooraseono'hamstatkarasim Tadaeva Sah. Aachchhidya Nyapatadbhumi Shooraseanakaraangalim. || 228 || Vajramushtistadaalokya Ma Bhaishiriti Bhaashat. Bhitahm iti Sa Shaathayaadaditaasmai Prithoraram. || 229 || Tadaeva Shooraseono'pi Bhratribhiladbhavittkai. Chauryenaang Bhavadbhaagam Grihaaneti Uditah Prithak. || 230 || Sa Bhavyo'tiviraktah Sanna Dhanena Prayojanam. Samsaraadatibhiito'ham Tadgrahisyaami Samyamam. || 231 || Ityatraveedayam Heto Kas Tapograhane Tava. Vadetyuktah Tai Schhinna Nijahstaangulitraanam. || 232 || Darshayitvaa'vadat Sarvamaatmangi Vichestitam. Tatsubhanu Samaakarnnya Streenindamakarod iti. || 233 || Staana Taaeva Nindaaya Paratraasakti Maagata. Varnamaatrena Rajantyyo Rajjayantyoparann Bhrisham. || 234 || Aadaaya Kritrimam Raagam Raaginaam Nayanapriya. Bibhratiha Bhrisham Bhaapaaramyaaschitraakriti Striya. || 235 || Sukham Vishayaj Praaptum Praasaamaadhurya Maalika. Kimpaakaphala Maalaa Va Kaana Hanyur Manorma. || 236 ||
Maatarah Kevalam Naeta Prajaanaameva Yosit. Doshaanam Api Dushshiksha Durvidya Iva Duhkhada. || 237 || 
And she, by means of sweet words, gestures, playful glances, and laughter and jest, quickly brought him under her control. She said to Shurasen, "I will go with you, take me with you." Hearing her words, he clearly said, "I am afraid of your husband, so you should not say such things." In reply, Mangi said, "Don't be afraid, that low, cowardly fellow, what can he do to you? Still, I will do whatever it takes to ensure that you are not harmed." || 222-225 ||
While they were talking to each other, Vajramushti arrived, holding a lotus in his hand. He placed his sword in Mangi's hand, and he himself, with devotion, bowed down to worship the two lotus feet of the Muni Raja. At that moment, his beloved raised her sword to strike him, but Shurasen immediately snatched the sword from her hand. As a result, Shurasen's fingers were cut off and fell to the ground. || 226-228 ||
Seeing this, Vajramushti said, "My dear, don't be afraid." In reply, Mangi lied and said, "Yes, I was afraid." || 229 ||
At that time, Shurasen's six brothers arrived with stolen wealth and said to him, "Brother, take your share." || 230 ||
But he, being extremely detached, said, "I have no use for wealth, I am very afraid of the world, so I will take up the practice of restraint." || 231 ||
Hearing this, his brothers said, "What is the reason for you taking up austerity? Tell us." Thus, urged by his brothers, he showed them the wound of his severed fingers and told them everything about his dealings with Mangi. Hearing this, Subhanu began to criticize women, saying, || 232-233 ||
"Women who are attached to other men are the source of slander. They appear beautiful merely because of their complexion, and they make other men intensely lustful. They appear pleasing to the eyes of lustful men only because of their artificial love, and they adorn themselves with various ornaments and wear beautiful, elaborate costumes." || 234-235 ||
"They seem very sweet to obtain worldly pleasures, but in the end, they are like a bunch of bitter fruits. The Acharya says that these women can destroy anyone, that is, they can destroy everyone." || 236 ||
These women are not only the mothers of the people, but they are also the cause of suffering, like bad education and bad knowledge. || 237 ||
1. Shranamantam Lo. 2. Chhinnam Lo. 3. Maashritaah Lo.

Page #419:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Chapter

361. Soft, cool, smooth, and generally giving pleasure to the touch, they are like serpents, life-takers, and embodiments of sin. || 238 ||

The poison of serpents resides only in their fangs, and even then it does not kill everyone. But the poison of women resides in their entire body, it is inherent to them, and cannot be removed, and it always kills. || 239 ||

Wicked people harm others only while they are alive, not after death. But women, who are like violence, continue to harm even after death, with their compassion mixed with hatred. || 240 ||

Those who have created the concept of poison-women separately do not know that all women, by virtue of their birth or their female nature, are poison-women. || 241 ||

These women are the epitome of cunning, their cruelty knows no bounds, they are always embodiments of the five sins, and their actions are as wicked as those of a man wielding a sword. Why then should they not be considered uncivilized? || 242 ||

Thus, Subhanu, along with his brothers, renounced the world, gave away all his wealth to women, and took initiation from the venerable Vardhamana Muni. || 243 ||

His wives also practiced austerities under the guidance of the Aryika named Jindatta. This is only natural, for who would not be drawn to practice austerities in the presence of worthy souls? || 244 ||

The next day, these seven brothers arrived in the forest of Ujjayini. Vajramusti approached them, paid his respects according to the proper rituals, and asked, "Why have you taken this initiation?" They explained the true reason for their initiation. Similarly, Vajramusti's wife, Mangyi, also asked the Aryikas about the reason for their initiation and, having gained true knowledge, took initiation under their guidance. Vajramusti became a disciple of the venerable Vardhamana Muni. At the end of their lifespan, Subhanu and the other seven Munis renounced their mortal bodies and attained the realm of the Trayastrimsa gods in the first heaven. || 245 - 248 ||

Their lifespan there was as vast as two oceans. From there, by the power of their own merit, they were reborn in the Dhataki-khanda island, in the Bharat-kshetra, in the southern range of the Vijayardha mountain, in the city of Nityaloka, as the son of the beautiful queen of King Chandrachula, named Chitrangada. || 249 - 250 ||

It is not only mothers who are mothers of children, but also mothers of faults. Just as bad education leads to bad knowledge, which brings suffering, so too do women bring suffering. || 337 ||

Although these women are soft, cool, smooth, and generally give pleasure to the touch, they are like serpents, life-takers, and embodiments of sin. || 238 ||

Page #420:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, and other texts, it is said that the Yama's were born from the same parents. They were Garuda Dhwajavahan, Garuda Vahan, Manichula, Pushpachula, Gaganandan, and Gaganachar. In the eastern Bharat Kshetra of the Dhataki Khandadweep, in the southern range of the Vijayardh mountain, there is a city called Meghpur. In this city, King Dhananjay ruled. His queen was named Sarvasri, and they had a daughter named Dhanashri, who was as beautiful as Lakshmi herself. In the same southern range of Vijayardh, there is a city called Nandapur, where King Harishen, who was like a lion to his enemies, ruled. His wife was named Shrikant, and they had a son named Harivahan. He was known for his virtues and was the brother-in-law of Dhanashri. In the city of Ayodhya in the same Bharat Kshetra, Dhanashri's Swayamvar took place. In this Swayamvar, Dhanashri lovingly placed the garland around Harivahan's neck. In the same Ayodhya, there was a Chakravarti king named Pushpadant. His wife was named Preetiinkari, and they had a son named Sudatt, who was skilled in evil deeds. Sudatt killed Harivahan and took Dhanashri for himself.

Seeing all this, the seven brothers, including Chitrangad, became disillusioned and took refuge at the feet of Shri Bhootanand Tirthankar, embracing Sannyasa. At the end of their lifespan, they became Samanik deities in the fourth heaven. They lived for seven Sagars there. After that, they were expelled from there and came to the Hastinapur city in the Kuru Jangal region of the same Bharat Kshetra. In this city, a merchant named Shweta Vahan, along with his wife Bandhumati, had a son named Shankh, who was the reincarnation of Subhanu. This Subhanu was himself Kubera in terms of wealth. In the same city, King Gangadev resided. His wife was named Nandayasha, and from them, three pairs of sons were born to Subhanu's six brothers. Their names were Ganga, Gangadev, Gangamitra, Nand, Sunand, and Nandishen. These six brothers lived together with great affection. When Nandayasha was pregnant with her seventh child, the king became sad. The queen attributed the king's sadness to the child in her womb, so she ordered Revati, the nurse, to take the child away.

Revati brought the child to Nandayasha's elder sister, Bandhumati, as soon as he was born. He was named Nirnamak. One day, all of them went to the Nandanvan. There, the king's six sons were eating together. Seeing this, Shankh said to Nirnamak, "You also eat with them."

Page #421:
---------------------------
The seventy-first chapter.

363

Seeing Nandayasha, who was sitting there to eat, Shankha asked, "Whose son is this?" and kicked him. Both Shankha and Nirnamak were very sad about this incident. One day, Shankha and Nirnamak went to pay their respects to the Avadhi-knowing Muni,  Druma-sena, along with the king. Both of them paid their respects to the Muni, listened to the Dharma, and then Shankha asked the Muni, "Why does Nandayasha get angry with Nirnamak without any reason?" When asked this, the Muni said, "In the country of Surastra, there is a city called Girinagar. The king's name was Chitra-ratha. Chitra-ratha had a cook named Amrita-rasayana. He was very skilled in cooking meat, so the meat-loving king was pleased and gave him twelve villages. One day, King Chitra-ratha heard the teachings of the Muni, Sudharma. 265-272.

By having faith, the king attained the three jewels. As a result, he gave the kingdom to his son, Megha-ratha, and became a disciple. Megha-ratha, the prince, also became a Shravak. 273.

After that, King Megha-ratha left only one village for the cook, taking away all the others. Thinking, "It is because of these Muni's teachings that the king stopped eating meat and his son took away our villages," the cook developed hatred for the Muni. One day, the cook prepared a meal of cooked beans with all kinds of spices for the Muni. Because of this, the Muni went to Mount Girnar and died. He died in Samadhi and became the Ahmin-dra, the holder of great powers, in the Aparajita, a Kalpa-atita Vimana, where he lived a short life. The cook, at the end of his life, went to the third hell and after coming out of it, wandered in the world for a long time, suffering many hardships. 274-277.

After that, in the Mangala country, which is part of the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa, in the village of Palasha-kuta, a son named Yaksha was born to the householder Yaksha-datta and his wife, Yaksha-datta. Some time later, another son named Yakshil was born to Yaksha-datta and Yaksha-datta. Of the two brothers, the elder brother was Nir-anukampa, without compassion, according to his actions, so people called him Nir-anukampa according to his actions. The younger brother was Sanukampa, compassionate, so people called him Sanukampa. 278-280.

One day, both brothers were going somewhere in a carriage. On the way, a blind snake was sitting. Sanukampa,

Page #422:
---------------------------
364
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, describes how a cart loaded with pots, driven by oxen, crushed a snake. The snake, suffering from the pain, died without any desire or attachment. || 282 || In the city of Shwetavika, the king Vasava's queen, Vasundhara, gave birth to a daughter named Nandayasha. || 283 ||  Niranukampa, the younger brother, with compassion, tried to dissuade his elder brother, Niranukampa, from causing suffering to others.  He said, "Such actions are not befitting for you."  Niranukampa, upon being advised, attained peace. || 284 ||  At the end of his life, Niranukampa was reborn as Nirnamak. This was due to the ripening of the negative karma he had accumulated in his previous life. || 285 ||  Nandayasha harbored anger towards Nirnamak.  Hearing this, the six sons of the king, along with Shank and Nirnamak, became detached and took the vows of Jainism. || 286 ||  Similarly, driven by their love for their sons, Nandayasha and Revati, the nurse, also took the vows of Jainism under the guidance of Aryika Suvrata. || 287 ||  Due to their foolishness, both Aryikas made a 'nidan' (a vow). Nandayasha vowed that her sons would be reborn as her sons in the next life, while Revati vowed to take care of them. || 288 ||  After performing austerities and worshipping according to their merits, they all attained the heavenly abode of Mahashukra, becoming gods of the Samanika caste. They lived for sixteen oceans of years and enjoyed divine pleasures. || 289-290 ||  Shank, after his fall from heaven, was reborn as Baldev, wielding a plough as his weapon. Nandayasha was reborn as Devaki, the daughter of King Devsen of Dasharnapur in the country of Mrigavati, born to Queen Dhandevi.  Due to the 'nidan' bond, you were born as a woman. || 291-292 ||  Revati was reborn as Alka, the wife of Sudrishti, a wealthy merchant, in the city of Bhadrailapur in the country of Malaya.  Your six sons were born in three births, two sons in each birth, from the previous six sons.  At that time, due to the fear of Kansa, Indra ordered the sage Naigamarshi to take them to Alka, the wealthy merchant's wife, who raised them. || 293-294 ||  Their names were Devdatta, Devpal, Anikdatta, Anikpal, Shatrughna, and Jitshatru.  All of them will attain liberation in this very life. || 295-296 ||  They all took the vows of Jainism at a young age and came to the city to beg for alms.  Seeing them, you felt a love for them that stemmed from your past life. || 297 ||

Page #423:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Chapter

365. Seeing the glory of the Self-born Keshava during his penance, the son of Nirnamak, who was destined to be the slayer of Kamsa, was born. 298. "From where did you come? From where did these sons of yours come? And how did this connection come about without any reason? It seems that the manifestation of karma is very strange and incomprehensible even to yogis." 299. Thus, the Lord, who was naturally compassionate to all the worthy beings, spoke. Devaki, with devotion, bowed to him. 300. Then, Satyabhama, who was also full of devotion, asked the Lord, who was the bearer of the Aksharavatika, about her past lives. 301. He, in turn, explained to her what she desired to know. "There is no other work for those who have attained their goal, except for grace." 302. He said, "When the Dharma was destroyed in the Tirtha of the Jina, known as Sheetala, King Megharatha ruled the city of Bhadraila. His queen was named Nanda. At that time, there was a great Brahmin named Bhootisharma in that city. His wife was Kamala, and they had a son named Mundashalayan. Although Mundashalayan was a master of the Vedas and Vedangas, his mind was always attached to worldly pleasures. Therefore, he used to say, 'It is useless to undergo the hardships of penance. It is only the foolish and the poor, who are courageous, who have imagined this hardship of penance for the sake of the next world. In reality, one can obtain desired happiness through gifts of land, gold, etc.' Thus, he, who was skilled in presenting many false examples and arguments, misled the king with words that were not true, and made him incapable of enduring bodily hardships. He continued to give such advice to other foolish people throughout his life. Finally, after death, he went to the seventh hell. From there, he was reborn as a beast. In this way, he continued to wander in the hellish and animal realms." 303-308. In due course, he was born as a hunter named Kala, due to the manifestation of his past karma, in the village of Bhallanki, near the Gandhavati river, which originates from the Gandhamadana mountain. Once, he went to the Muni, Vardharma, and renounced the three M's (madhu, maamsa, and madya). As a result, he was born as the son of King Purubala and his queen, Jyotirmaala, in the city of Alaka, on the Vijayardha mountain. He was named Haribala. He then went to the Muni, Anantavirya,

Page #424:
---------------------------
366
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Anantavirya, having taken the vow of Dravya-Samyama, became a god in the Saudharma Kalpa. After being expelled from there, he was born on the Vijayardha mountain as the daughter of Suketo, the king of Rathnupura, and his queen, Swayamprabha. She was named Satyabhama. 

One day, her father asked a skilled astrologer, proficient in the knowledge of Niti, "Whose wife will my daughter be?" The astrologer, a great expert in Niti, replied, "She will be the Mahadevi of the Ardhachakravarti." Hearing this prediction from the Ganadhara, Satyabhama was very pleased. 

Later, Mahadevi Rukmini, bowing to her past lives, asked the Ganadhara, whose every action was for the benefit of others, "Where was I born in my previous life?" 

The Ganadhara replied, "In the Magadha region of the Bharat Kshetra, there is a village called Lakshmi-grama. There lived a Brahmin named Soma, whose wife was Lakshmi-mati. One day, Lakshmi-mati, adorned with ornaments, was about to look in the mirror when a Muni named Samadhi-gupta arrived for alms. 

"Her body was covered in sweat and dirt, and she was emitting a foul odor." Filled with anger, Lakshmi-mati, with disgust, spoke harshly to the Muni. 

Due to the sin of insulting the Muni, her entire body became afflicted with a leprosy called Udumbara. Wherever she went, people would chase her away, calling her a dog with harsh words. 

She lived in a deserted house and finally died, filled with love for her husband, in great sorrow. In the same house, a foul-smelling, six-foot-long snake was born. 

Because of her love for her husband in her previous life, she would repeatedly run towards him. In anger, he caught her and threw her outside with great cruelty. She died and was reborn as a snake in the same Brahmin's house. 

Then, due to her own sins, she was reborn as a donkey. She would repeatedly go to the Brahmin's house, so the Brahmin, in anger, beat her with sticks and stones, breaking her leg. Worms infested her wounds, and in agony, she fell into a well and died. 

Then she was born as a blind snake, and after dying, she became a blind pig. The pig was eaten by dogs in the village. She was then reborn as the daughter of a fisherman named Matsya, who lived in the village of Mandir and ferried people across the river. Her mother was a frog named Manduki, and she was named Putika, a sinner.

Page #425:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Chapter

397
Her father had passed away after her birth, and her mother too had departed. Her maternal grandmother raised her, but she was surrounded by all kinds of inauspiciousness. 

328
One day, she was sitting by the riverbank, when she saw the Samadhi-gupta Muni, who was in a state of Samadhi, in the form of a statue. 

329
She had previously slandered the Muni in the form of Lakshmi-mati.  She was fortunate that the time was auspicious for her, and she was able to attain peace. She spent the whole night near the Muni's body, driving away mosquitoes and other insects.

330
When the Muni emerged from his Samadhi in the morning, she approached his lotus feet and listened to his Dharma-deshana. 

331
Inspired by the Dharma-deshana, she vowed to observe a fast on the Parva day. The next day, she was going to worship the Jina, when she saw an Aryika. 

332
She went with the Aryika to another village, where she received food. She continued to live in a cave on a mountain, sustaining herself on the food brought from the village, and protecting her conduct from the fear of sin. 

333
One day, a Shravaka came to the Aryika. The Aryika said, "It is amazing that Pootika, born into a low family, still observes such good conduct." The Shravaka was very curious to hear this. 

334
After Pootika had finished her worship, the Shravaka approached her and praised her. Pootika replied, "Mother, I am a great sinner. Why do you call me virtuous?" She then recounted the stories of her past lives that she had heard from Samadhi-gupta Muni. 

335
The Shravaka was Pootika's friend from a past life. Hearing this, she said, "This being attains the Jain path and Jain Dharma out of fear of sin. In this world, who does not suffer from ugliness, sickness, bad smell, and poverty, due to the ripening of past sins? All suffer from these things. So do not grieve. The vows, conduct, and fasts that you have observed are like a rare treasure for your future births. Do not fear." 

338
The Shravaka encouraged her greatly. After that, she attained Samadhi-death and became the beloved of Achyuta-indra. She enjoyed uninterrupted happiness for fifty-five Palyas. 

340
From there, she was reborn as Rukmini, the daughter of King Vasava and Queen Shrimati, in the city of Kundala, in the Vidarbha region. 

325-341

Page #426:
---------------------------
## Translation:

398
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, the son of the king of Kosala, named Bheshaja, was born to Rugmini. His son, Shishupala, was born in Madra with three eyes. 342

"This is unprecedented among humans, what is the consequence of this?" The king asked. The Naimittika (one who knows the consequences of events) clearly replied. 343

"The one whose sight will cause the third eye to disappear, he will be killed by him, there is no doubt about it." 344

One day, Bheshaja, Madri, Shishupala, and others went to Dwaravati to see Vasudeva (Krishna) with great eagerness. As soon as Shishupala saw Krishna, his third eye disappeared. This is because the powers of substances are strange. 345-346

Remembering the Naimittika's words, Madri, fearing for her son, saw this and, trembling, begged Krishna, "O venerable one, please grant me the boon of my son's life." 347

Krishna replied, "O Amba (mother), I will not fear him until he commits a hundred offenses. That is, I will not kill him until he commits a hundred offenses." Having received this boon from Krishna, Madri returned to her city. 348

Shishupala, even in his childhood, shone like the sun. Just as the sun's disc is pure, so too was his group of ministers, free from hatred. Just as the sun, rising, destroys darkness, so too did Shishupala, rising, constantly destroy the darkness of his enemies. Just as the sun delights the lotus, so too did Shishupala delight Lakshmi. Just as the sun's rays are sharp and hot, so too was his revenue heavy. Just as the sun is cruel and hot, so too was Shishupala cruel and wicked. Just as the sun is powerful and full of brilliance, so too was Shishupala powerful, possessing the brilliance born of his army and treasury. Just as the sun, hiding the brilliance of other things, places its rays on the head of the mountains, so too did Shishupala, hiding the brilliance of others, place his feet on the heads of kings. He considered himself superior to all kings, and like a lion, he desired to attack Krishna and control him according to his will. 349-351

Thus, Shishupala, arrogant, marked by fame that spread throughout the world, and devoted to his own life, committed a hundred offenses against Krishna. 352

He considered himself superior, the crown of all, and always engaged in worthy deeds.

Page #427:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Letter
366
Even though the group of enemies is peaceful, it destroys like a collection of sins. A king who desires victory should not delay in destroying his enemy, just like a seeker of liberation. || 354 ||
Thus, your father was about to give you to Shishupala, as time passed. Hearing this, Narada, who was eager for war, informed Krishna of everything. || 355 ||
Krishna, endowed with six types of forces, went and killed Shishupala, and brought you back and placed you on the throne of the great queen. Hearing this, she was overjoyed. || 356 ||
Hearing this story, who would despise the great sages, considering them to be impure? || 358 ||
Then, Jambavati, bowing to the sage, asked about her past lives. The Lord replied with respect: || 359 ||
In this Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, there is a country called Pushkalavati. In its city of Vitashoka, there lived a Vaishya named Damaka. || 360 ||
His wife was Devamati, and they had a daughter named Devila. She was given to Vasumitra, but became a widow after some time. || 361 ||
Disillusioned, she went to the Jinadeva and took vows. At the end of her life, she became a Vyantara Devi in the Nandana forest on Mount Meru. || 362 ||
After that, when her eighty-four thousand years of life in Pushkalavati, in the city of Vijayapur, came to an end, she was reborn as the daughter of Madhushena, a Vaishya, and Bandhumati, a beautiful woman named Bandhuyasha. Her prosperity continued to grow. || 363 ||
She had a friend named Jindata, the daughter of Jinadeva. Together, they performed austerities, and as a result, they became the beloved of Kubera in the first heaven. || 364 ||
From there, she was reborn in the city of Vajra in the country of Pundarika, as the daughter of a Vaishya named Suvarna and his wife, Suprabha. Her name was Sumati, and she was the best of daughters. || 366 ||
There, she offered food to the Ayika named Suvrata, and performed the Ratnavala fast, which made her a great Apsara in the Brahma heaven. || 367 ||
After a long time, she was reborn in this Jambudvipa, on the mountain of Khechara, in the city of Jambava, as the daughter of King Jambava and Queen Jambushena. Her name was Jambavati. || 368 ||
She was the daughter of Jambushena, and the wife of the son of Pavana, who was a lover of Shyamala. || 369 ||

Page #428:
---------------------------
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

"Even if she doesn't want to, I will take Jambavati by force, even if I have to stay in the Jyotirvana for a long time."  (370)

Jambavan, enraged, said, "I will devour you!" and sent the Maaksikalakshita Vidya to kill him. (371)

At that time, the Yakshmali, the Vidhyadhara king of Kinnarapura, the maternal uncle of Namikumar, was present. He destroyed the Vidya. (372)

Hearing that all his Vidya had been destroyed, Jambavan sent his son, Jambunama, with his army. When Jambunama arrived, Namikumar, fearing for his life, fled with his maternal uncle. What else can be the result of actions done without thought, but defeat? (373-374)

Narada, knowing all this, quickly went to Kamalodara (Krishna) and described the beauty of Jambavati. Hearing this, Krishna said, "I will forcibly take that Sati." With his army, he went to the forest near the Vijayardha mountain. Baldev was with him. (375-376)

Knowing that this task was very difficult, Krishna observed a fast and pondered at night, "Who will help me achieve this?"  Look, even though he had conquered three worlds, Krishna's future seemed to be shattered there. But the merit of Krishna, the enemy of that Vidhyadhara king, was equally powerful. (377-378)

Yakshil, his younger brother from a previous birth, who had become a Maha Shukra in heaven through penance, came and said, "I give you these two Vidya. You should master them." Saying this, and showing him how to master them, he went to heaven. Krishna created a Ksheerasagara (ocean of milk) and sat on a serpent bed in it. He mastered the Vidya for four months, following the proper procedures. In the end, Baldev mastered the Simhavahiini Vidya and Krishna mastered the Garuda Vahini Vidya. (379-381)

Then, mounted on those Vidya, Krishna defeated Jambavan in battle and took his daughter, Jambavati. On returning home, he happily appointed her as the Mahadevi. (382)

Although the story of his previous birth was unclear, it became as clear as day to Jambavati when she heard it from the mouth of a special speaker. (383)

Page #429:
---------------------------
The Eighty-Seventh Chapter
403

Thereafter, the queen Susima asked the chief of the ascetics, the lord of the congregation, about the connection of her previous births. 384 The one who is the kinsman of the disciples without any reason, enlightening his lotus-like mind with the multitude of the rays of his speech, spoke thus. 385 In the former part of the Dhātakīkhaṇḍa, in the Prāgvidehā, there is a renowned region called Maṅgalāvatī, which is the sole object of enjoyment for the embodied beings. 386 There is a city named Ratnasañcaya in it, whose protector was the king Viśvadeva, and his beautiful queen was called Śrīmatyanuṇdarī. 387 The king of Ayodhyā killed him in battle, due to which the queen, though forbidden by the ministers, entered the fire and died. 388 Becoming a Sūrī (celestial being) on the Vijayārḍha mountain, she lived for ten thousand years among the Vyantaras. At the end of that, wandering according to her karmas, 389 in this Bhārata-dvīpa, in Śāligrāma, she became the daughter of the Yakṣa-devī, the intelligent Devī, born to the Yakṣa couple Devasena and Devasena. 390 Once, taking refuge in the sage Dharmasena, the virtuous one, and giving sustenance to the fasting monk for a month, 391 she went to the forest for recreation, and due to fear of rain, entered a cave, where she was swallowed by a python, due to which the Harivṛṣa region was produced. 392 Entering into those enjoyments, she became a Nāgī (female serpent), and then fell from there to this Videha region, where she was born as Puṣkalāvatī, the daughter of King Aśoka and Queen Somaśrī. 393-394 At the end of the Jinavarṇa-upānte, she took initiation, and after performing severe austerities for a long time and observing the Kanakāvalī fast, 395 she became a celestial being in the Māhendra heaven, enjoyed the pleasures of the gods, and at the end of her life, fell from there and became the daughter of the virtuous Queen Sujyeṣṭhā, the wife of King Surāṣṭravarddhana. 396-397 You, the auspicious one, are now the beloved queen of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the king of Surāṣṭra, and you are flourishing with joy. 398 Hearing about the connection of her previous births, Susima the queen attained satisfaction, for who does not attain contentment upon hearing about their successive growth?

Thereafter, Queen Lakṣmaṇā also paid obeisance to the sage and desired to hear about her births.

Page #430:
---------------------------
402
In the Uttar Purana of the Mahapurana, the subject is Pushkalavati, which is located in the eastern Videha region. There, the king Vasu ruled over the city of Arishtpur. 40
His queen was Vasumati, and their son was Sushena, a repository of all virtues. For some reason, King Vasu renounced the world and took initiation from the sage Sagar Sena. 10
His beloved queen Vasumati was deeply attached to her son and was unable to leave her home. Due to her attachment, she died and was reborn as a Pulinda woman. 402
She then approached the Charana Muni Nandivardhana and took the vows of a Shravaka. 4.3
In her eighth birth, she became the beloved dancer of Indra in the celestial realm. From there, she descended to the Bharata Kshetra of Jambudvipa and was born in the southern range of the Vijaya mountain as the daughter of the king of Chandrapur, Mahendra. 40
She was named Kanakmala, a beautiful woman who was the apple of her mother Anundari's eye. In the Swayamvara of Siddhavidya, she chose Harivahana as her husband by placing a garland around his neck. 405
One day, she went to the Siddhakut and approached the guru Yamadhara, who was seated there. She inquired about her past lives. 407
After that, she performed the Muktavali fast and became the beloved queen of Indra in the third heaven. She lived for nine kalpas, and at the end of her life, she was reborn as the daughter of the queen of the king Shambara, who ruled over the city of Suprakara. 40
You are the younger sister of Padma and Dhruvasena. You are the eldest in terms of virtues and possess all auspicious qualities. Your name is Lakshmana. 409
One day, a Vidyadhara named Pavanavega approached Lord Krishna and said, "O Chakrapati, the king of the Vidyadharas, Shambara, has a daughter named Lakshmana. She is as beautiful as a spotless moonbeam in the sky, she is arousing to the senses, and she is worthy of you." 41
Upon hearing these words, Lord Krishna said, "Then bring her to me." He sent Pavanavega, who quickly went and, with the consent of your parents, brought you to him and presented you to Lord Krishna. 413
Lord Krishna then honored you by tying the Mahadevi's sacred thread around your wrist. 414
Upon hearing this account of her past lives, Lakshmana was overjoyed. 41
Later, Lord Krishna asked about the past lives of Gandhari, Gauri, and Padmavati. Then, Ganadhara Deva said, 
1 Hrimatyaasch La. 2 Tanuja La.

Page #431:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Chapter
I
In this Jambudvipa, there is a country called Sukoushala. In its Ayodhya city, there reigned a king named Rudra, with his beautiful queen Vinayashri. In the past, in a forest called Siddhartha, she had given food to a Muni named Buddhartha, and at the end of her life, she was born in the Uttarakuru, a land of great pleasures. After enjoying the pleasures there, she was reborn as Chandravati, the queen of the moon. At the end of her life, she was reborn in the southern range of the Vijayardha mountain in this Jambudvipa, in the city of Gaganavallabha, as the daughter of the radiant king Vidyudvega, the king of the Vidyadharas. Her name was Vidyudvega-Surupa. She was given in marriage to the king Mahendravikrama, the ruler of Nityaloka, who was renowned for his knowledge and prowess. One day, both of them, eager to worship the Jina, went to Mount Sumeru. 
 
There, they drank the nectar of Dharma, flowing from the mouth of a Charana Muni, adorned with the radiance of the moon, and attained supreme satisfaction. 
 
Of the two, King Mahendravikrama took initiation from the same Charana Muni, while Queen Surupa, going to the feet of Aryika Subhadra, embraced the path of non-violence. 
 
After completing her lifespan, she became a goddess in the Saudharma heaven. When her lifespan there, equivalent to a Paly, was completed, she was reborn as the daughter of King Indragiri, the ruler of Pushkaravati city in the Gandhara country. Her name was Gandhari. King Indragiri wanted to give her in marriage to his nephew. When Narada, the messenger of the world, heard this, he immediately informed you of this evil plan. Hearing this, you, driven by love, prepared your army and went to war. You defeated King Indragiri and his allies, took Gandhari, and crowned her as your queen. 
 
Now, I will tell you about Gauri's births. Listen, Madhava! In this Jambudvipa, there is a very famous city called Punnagapura. Its protector was King Hemabha, and his queen was Yashasvati. One day, she saw Charana Muni Yashodhara, and remembered her past lives. When the king asked her, she, bathing him with the radiance of her teeth, told him about her past lives.

Page #432:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana,
In the Dhaataki Khand, east of Meru, in the Videha region, there is a city called Ashoka Pura. There lived a wealthy merchant named Anand. His wife gave birth to a daughter named Anandayasha. 
Anandayasha, having given food to the Jina Amit Sagar, attained the five wonders. Due to the merit of this donation, she was born in Uttara Kuru at the end of her life. After enjoying happiness there, she became the queen of the Bhavan Vasi Indra. From there, she was born here. Thus, Queen Yashasvati told her husband, King Hemabha, about her previous births with great joy. 
After that, Queen Yashasvati went to a forest called Siddhartha. There, she observed a fast in the presence of the Muni Raja Sagar Sena. At the end of her life, she became a Devi in the first heaven. After completing her stay there, she was born as the daughter of a wealthy merchant named Sumati, named Dharmikee, from his wife Subhadra in the city of Kaushambi in this Jambudvipa. 
Here, she diligently followed the vow of Jina Guna Sampatti given by Jina Mati Arthika. Due to its influence, she became a Devi in the Maha Shuka heaven after death. After a long time, she was born as the daughter of King Meru Chandra, the ruler of Veet Shoka Nagar, named Gauri, from his queen Chandravati. She was a mine of beauty, grace, and radiance. The affectionate King Vijay Nandana, the ruler of Vijayapura Nagar, brought her to you, and you made her your queen. Thus, the Ganadhar Bhagwan told Gauri's past births, which made Shri Krishna happy. 
After that, the Ganadhar Dev, the mine of virtues, who captivates the minds of people, began to tell the story of Padmavati's past births. 
In the same Bharat Kshetra, in the city of Ujjayini, King Vijay ruled. His queen was Aparajita, who was as invincible as his valor. They had a daughter named Vinaya Shree. She was given to King Harishena of Hastashirsha Pura. Vinaya Shree once gave food to the Muni Raja Samadhi Gupta with great joy. Due to the merit of this donation, she was born in the Hemavat region. After enjoying the pleasures there for a long time, she became the Devi Rohini of the moon at the end of her life. When her lifespan there, equivalent to a Palya, ended, she was born as the daughter of Padma Devi in the village of Salmali in the Magadha country. 
She was the wife of Vijay Dev and once, in the presence of Varadharma Yati, she took a vow.

Page #433:
---------------------------
The Seventy-First Chapter

A virtuous woman named Padmavati, the daughter of Vijayadevi, was born in a village. She took a firm vow in the presence of a Muni named Dharma, "I will not eat unknown fruits even in times of scarcity." Once, a group of Bhil warriors, intent on plunder and destruction, attacked the village. Fearing the Bhil king, Simharath, everyone fled with Padmavati into the dense forest. There, consumed by hunger, they all ate poisonous fruits and died quickly. However, fearing a breach of her vow, Padmavati did not touch the fruits and thus died without food. She was reborn in the blissful realm of the Himavat region. Upon completing her lifespan there, she was reborn as a goddess named Swayamprabha in the Swayamprabha island. From there, she was reborn as the beautiful daughter of King Shridhara and Queen Shrimati in the city of Jayantapur, located in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa. She became the beloved queen of King Meghnath, the ruler of Bhaangilapur.  

One day, King Meghnath, a man of pure intellect, renounced his kingdom and became a devotee of Muni Dharma. He attained the position of Indra in the Sahasrar heaven, where he enjoyed a lifespan of eighteen oceans and radiated a brilliant light. Meanwhile, Queen Vimalshree, seeking liberation, went to Padmavati, the embodiment of austerity, and undertook the Chaamlavardhana fast. As a result, she too attained the status of a goddess in the Sahasrar heaven at the end of her lifespan. After completing her lifespan there, she was reborn as Padmavati, the daughter of Queen Shrimati, the wife of King Hiranyavarma, the ruler of Arishtapur. In her swayamvara, she honored you by offering a garland of jewels, expressing her affection. Subsequently, this virtuous woman attained the position of Mahadevi. 

Thus, hearing their past lives from the mouth of Ganadhara Bhagavan, the three queens of Shri Krishna, Gauri, Gandhari, and Padmavati, were filled with joy. 

In this way, Ganadhara Deva, a repository of virtues, vividly described the conclusive evidence, adorned with past lives, using clear and sweet words. Shri Krishna, listening intently to the stories of his beloved eight queens, filled with joy and sorrow, was greatly pleased. These stories, narrated at the end, are a source of prosperity.

Page #434:
---------------------------
406
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
The divine words of the Muni-pungava, which destroy the sins accumulated over many births, were accepted by the Devis with joy. They placed them in their hearts and were delighted. They all applied their minds to the Dharma of the Arhant Bhagavan, which is beneficial and brings great happiness. || 461 ||
"In this world, there is no other work that is beneficial except Dharma. The character of those who are foolish and devoid of Dharma is despicable. Thinking in this way, all the members of the assembly, free from sin, accepted the Dharma spoken by Sri Neminath Bhagavan." || 462 ||
Thus ends the seventy-first chapter of the Nemicharita, a part of the Trishattilakshana Mahapuraana, composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya, known as Bhavanantara Varnana. || 71 ||

Page #435:
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:

The seventy-second chapter
Now, the wise Baladev, desiring to reveal the three worlds and their previous existence, questioned the connection between Pradyumna and Sambhava. Then, the Ganadhar Varadatta, out of compassion, spoke as follows:

In this Jambudvipa, in the region of Magadha, there lived a Brahmin named Somadeva, whose wife was named Agnilakshya. They had two sons, Agnibhuti and Vayubhuti, who one day went to the beautiful village of Nandivardhan. There, they saw the Muni Nandivardhan, who was the ornament of the Muni Sangha, in the forest of Nandighosha.

Seeing these two wicked ones, the Muni-lord told the other Munis, "These two, tainted by Mithyatva (false belief), have come to create dissension. None of you should engage in conversation with them, otherwise a great calamity will befall you."

Hearing the words of the guiding teacher, all the Munis, observing the vow of silence, remained steadfast. Seeing the silence of all, the two Brahmins, mocking, went towards their village. On the way, they encountered the Muni Satyaka, who had gone to another village for alms. Impelled by arrogance, they approached him and said, "O naked one! There is no attained one, no scripture, and no substance at all. Why do you, a fool, needlessly suffer on this wrong path, seeing the destruction (of the real)?"

The Muni, taking recourse to the supreme Syadvada propounded by the words of the Jina, and establishing the validity of the knower, explained the substance of the categories along with their causes. He also elucidated the appropriate position of the scriptural teachings regarding the unseen realities, and thus removed the itch for debate of those wicked Brahmins.

Page #436:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana
Their victory flag was taken by the twice-born, who were dedicated to it. Those two, filled with anger born of insult, went out at night with sharp weapons. || 15 || The next day, those two evil-doers went out to a secluded place where the pure-minded Satyaka Muni, the best of the ascetics, was engaged in the practice of image-yoga. || 16 || They were ready to attack him with weapons, thinking it was just. The twice-born were then stopped by the golden Yaksha, as if they were nailed. || 17 || Then their mothers, fathers, and relatives came seeking refuge. The wise Yaksha said to them, "If you abandon the religion of violence and accept the Jain religion, these two will be freed." || 18-19 || Frightened, they quickly said, "We will do so." They circumambulated the Muni, paid their respects to him according to the rules, and falsely accepted the religion of the Shravakas. || 20 || Then, when those two sons were freed from being nailed, their parents and others said to them, "You should now abandon this religion, because you had accepted it only due to circumstances." Those sons, being fortunate in time, did not deviate from the path of righteousness that they had embraced. || 21-22 || Seeing this behavior of their sons, their parents and others became angry with them and, after death, due to the ripening of their sins, wandered for a long time in various hells. On the other hand, those two Brahmin sons, having lived their lives with vows, after death, became excellent gods of the Parishada caste in the Saudharma heaven, with a lifespan of five palya. || 23-24 || There, they enjoyed many excellent pleasures. Then, in the city of Ayodhya, belonging to the Kosala country of this Jambudvipa, there reigned a powerful king named Ariñjaya, who conquered his enemies. In that city, there lived a wealthy merchant named Arhadasa, whose wife's name was Vaprishri. Those two, Agnibhuti and Vayubhuti, having descended from the fifth heaven, were born as the sons of Arhadasa and Vaprishri, named respectively, Purnabhadra and Manibhadra. One day, King Ariñjaya went to the presence of the teacher named Mahendra, who was residing in the forest called Siddhartha. There, he heard the teachings of religion from many people, which purified his mind. He entrusted the burden of the kingdom to his son, Ariñdama, who was capable of bearing it, and along with his servants and others, he embraced restraint. At that time, the son of the wealthy merchant, Purnabhadra,

Page #437:
---------------------------
The Muni was asked, "Where are my parents from my previous birth?" The Muni replied, "Your father, Somadev, committed many sins against Jainism, so he died and became a hell being in the serpent-infested region of the Ratnaprabha earth. From there, he was reborn as a Chandala named Kakajangha in this very city. Similarly, your mother, Agnilaka, was reborn as a dog in the same Chandala's house." Hearing this, Purnabhadra instructed both beings, leading them to attain peace and take monastic vows. As a result, Kakajangha became a Vyantara Deva named Kubera in the Nandishvara island, while the dog was reborn as a beloved daughter named Suprabuddha to the queen Srimatya of the city's king, Arindama. 

When she reached her full youth and was going towards the Swayamvara pavilion, her previous husband, the Yaksha Kubera, enlightened her. She then went to the Aryika Priyadarshana and took initiation. At the end of her life, she became a beautiful goddess named Manichula in the Saudharma heaven. Meanwhile, Purnabhadra and his younger brother, Manibhadra, diligently followed the vows of a Shravaka, spending their wealth in seven regions. At the end of their lives, both became gods of the Samanika caste in the Saudharma heaven. 

They lived there for two lifetimes, equivalent to two oceans. After their lifetimes ended, they were reborn as sons named Madhu and Kridava to the queen Kashyapa of the king Ahahsa, ruler of Hastinapur, a city in the Kurujangala region of Jambudvipa. One day, King Ahahsa gave the kingdom to Madhu and the position of Yuvaraja to Kridava, and both of them attained the pure discipleship of the Muni Vimala Prabha, meaning they took initiation from him. Once, the king Kanakaratha (Hemaratha) of the city of Amalakantha came to serve Madhu. Seeing his wife Kanakamala, Madhu was overcome with lust and took her as his own. This caused great sorrow to King Kanakaratha, who then took vows from the ascetic named Dwijati. 

Meanwhile, Madhu and Kridava were enjoying their lives. One day, Madhu heard the true nature of Dharma from the Muni Vimala Vahana, realized his own wrongdoings, and took vows along with Kridava. At the end of their lives, they performed their worship properly and became Indra in the Mahashukra heaven. After their lifetimes ended there, the elder brother, Madhu,

Page #438:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, 
The reign of Maha Shukra, along with his brother, came to an end. 
After his death, due to the rise of his remaining good karma, 
A son was born to Rukmini, preceded by a good dream. 
The sins earned through evil conduct are destroyed by righteous conduct. 
On the second day, a celestial being, resembling a blazing comet, was born in the celestial assembly. 
He was going to roam about in the sky, like the wind, at his own will. 
His chariot was above the body of Pradyumna. 
He wondered, "Who has done this?" 
He used his knowledge of the division of time and realized that this was his enemy from a previous life. 
When I was King Kanakaratha, he had abducted my wife out of pride. 
Now, I will make him taste the fruit of his actions. 
Burning with the fire of vengeance, he made all the inhabitants of the inner palace fall into a deep sleep. 
He lifted the child Pradyumna and carried him far away through the sky. 
He thought, "I will make him suffer so much that he will die after a long time." 
Inspired by the child's good karma, he descended from the sky. 
He went to the forest called Khadira and placed the child under the Takshaka rock. 
At that very moment, in the Amritavati region, which adorned the southern range of the Vijayadri mountain, 
The king of the city of Megha Kuta, the Vidyaadhara Kalasambhava, 
Was going to worship the Jain images with his beloved wife, Kanchanamala. 
Seeing the entire huge rock shaking violently, he was astonished. 
Looking around, he saw a child radiating light. 
He realized, "This is no ordinary child. Some evil being, an enemy from a previous life, has placed him here in anger. 
My dear, look, how he shines like a young sun. 
Therefore, my beautiful one, this is your son, take him." 
Thus, the Vidyaadhara took the child and said to his wife. 
The Vidyaadhari replied, "If you give him the position of the heir apparent, I will take him." 
The king agreed and tied a golden band around her ear, as a sign of acceptance. 
They took the child and entered the city, celebrating. 
They went to the Vyadhata, named Devadatta, and performed the necessary rituals. 
The soul has been born as a son to Rukmini, preceded by a good dream, due to the rise of his remaining good karma. 
This is right, because the sins earned through evil conduct are destroyed by righteous conduct. 
Here, King Kanakaratha, the soul, became a celestial being, a Jyotishi, named Dhumketu, who practiced penance. 
The child seemed like the intense sins accumulated in Pradyumna's previous life. 
On another day, he was going to roam about in the sky, like the wind, at his own will. 
When his chariot reached above the body of Pradyumna, it stopped as if someone had caught and held it. 
He wondered, "Who has done this?" 
He used his knowledge of the division of time and realized that this was his enemy from a previous life. 
When I was King Kanakaratha, he had abducted my wife out of pride. 
Now, I will make him taste the fruit of his actions. 
Burning with the fire of vengeance, he made all the inhabitants of the inner palace fall into a deep sleep. 
He lifted the child Pradyumna and carried him far away through the sky. 
He thought, "I will make him suffer so much that he will die after a long time." 
Inspired by the child's good karma, he descended from the sky. 
He went to the forest called Khadira and placed the child under the Takshaka rock. 
At that very moment, in the Amritavati region, which adorned the southern range of the Vijayadri mountain, 
The king of the city of Megha Kuta, the Vidyaadhara Kalasambhava, 
Was going to worship the Jain images with his beloved wife, Kanchanamala. 
Seeing the entire huge rock shaking violently, he was astonished. 
Looking around, he saw a child radiating light. 
He realized, "This is no ordinary child. Some evil being, an enemy from a previous life, has placed him here in anger. 
My dear, look, how he shines like a young sun. 
Therefore, my beautiful one, this is your son, take him." 
Thus, the Vidyaadhara took the child and said to his wife. 
The Vidyaadhari replied, "If you give him the position of the heir apparent, I will take him." 
The king agreed and tied a golden band around her ear, as a sign of acceptance. 
They took the child and entered the city, celebrating. 
They went to the Vyadhata, named Devadatta, and performed the necessary rituals.

Page #439:
---------------------------
The 27th festival, with its playful antics of the child, filled their hearts with joy. The time passed easily for these two, who were enjoying the best of comforts. || 6 || 

Here, Rukmini was consumed by the fire of grief, like a creeper of lotus in a forest fire, due to the separation from her son. || 12 || 

Wealth without compassion, devoid of character, does not shine. Similarly, a weak mind, unable to discern right from wrong, does not shine. And like a rain-laden cloud, which has already released its water, does not shine, so too, Rukmini does not shine. For, how can a body shine when the life has departed? || 13-64 || 

Similarly, Vasudeva too, was filled with grief due to the separation from his son. For, when a tree and a creeper are together, there is no need for separate thunderbolts to destroy them. || 65 || 

Just as a reservoir is a source of joy for a thirsty man, and a cloud for a peacock, so too, Narada came to bring joy to Vasudeva. || 66 || 

Seeing him, Vasudeva narrated the entire story of the child and said, "By any means, find him, wherever he may be." || 67 || 

Hearing this, Narada said, "Listen, O son of Videha, in the city of  Pundarika, I inquired about the child from the Tirthankara,  Swayamprabha. From his words, I learned about the child's past life. He is destined for growth, he will have great fortune, and after sixteen years, he will reunite with both of you." Thus, Narada explained to Vasudeva and Rukmini, as he had heard. || 68-70 || 

Just as the birth of the Jina brings immense joy to the celestial beings and the human world, so too, the words of Narada brought immense joy to Rukmini and Vasudeva. || 71 || 

Meanwhile, the virtuous Devadatta (Pradyumna), gradually attained youthful vigor. One day, following his father's command, Pradyumna, with his army, went forth to confront the enemy, Agniraja, and defeated him in battle, rendering him powerless. He then brought him before his father. || 72-73 || 

King Kalasamvara and Queen Kanchanamala, taking the child with them, entered their city, filled with many festivities. They named the child Devadatta, according to the rituals. || 60 || 

The king and queen, whose hearts were filled with joy due to the upbringing and playful antics of the child, and who were constantly experiencing the best of experiences, found their time passing without any deceit. || 61 ||

Page #440:
---------------------------
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, the king of the birds, Kalasambara, honored Pradyumna with great gifts.  [5]  Pradyumna, adorned with the celestial garland, appeared as if he had descended from heaven, his body shining brightly with ornaments. [75]  Seeing him, Kanchanmala, the queen of Kalasambara, was overcome with desire, her mind filled with the thoughts of love from past lives.  [76]  She revealed her inner feelings, though surrounded by sin, and said to the prince, "O Kumar, accept this Prajnapti Vidya from me, according to the proper rituals." [77]  She spoke thus, her words filled with deceit.  The wise Pradyumna agreed, saying, "Mother, I will do as you say." [70]  He took the Vidya and went to the Siddhakoota temple.  There, he bowed to the Charana Munis, the great sages, and listened to their teachings.  [79]  He then sought the guidance of the image of Sanjayanta Muni, learning the methods of attaining Vidya. [80]  He listened to the Purana of Sanjayanta Muni, and by the grace of his feet, he attained Vidya.  He then returned to his city, filled with joy. [81]  Seeing Pradyumna, whose beauty had doubled with the attainment of Vidya, Kanchanmala was consumed with desire.  She pleaded with him in many ways, but the wise prince did not yield. [2]  She realized that he was a man of virtue and not suitable for her desires.  She told her husband, Kalasambara, "This Kumar is not of noble birth, and he is not worthy of our company." [83]  Kalasambara, confused by her words, believed her.  He immediately summoned his five hundred sons, including Vidyudamstra, and said to them in private, "This Devadatta is worthy of death for his wickedness.  Kill him by any means." [85]  The king of the birds, Kalasambara, gave this order, and his sons, filled with anger, agreed.  They had already conspired to kill him, and now they had received the king's command.  They said, "We will do as you say," and went out to carry out their plan. [86-87]

Page #441:
---------------------------
## Forty-seventh Chapter

453

**88.**  Just as there is certain loss from a Shastra based on violence, from a kingdom devoid of policy, and from austerity practiced on a wrong path, so too there is certain loss from a wicked woman.

**89.**  Women with defects in their nature make a man's stable intellect fickle, turn the straight into the crooked, and cover up his brilliant intellect.

**90.**  These wicked women are satisfied and angry towards their husbands at the same time, and there is no other reason for this except for gain or loss.

**91.**  There is no remaining action that these wicked women cannot do.  Indeed, even the desire for a son, which was the only thing left, has been done by Kanchanmala.

**92.**  If even those women who have vows, good conduct, and other virtues do not attain purity, how can those who lack these virtues attain purity?

**93.**  Just as a bird does not stay on the lotus leaf, so too the minds of these women do not stay on any man.  Even when touched, they remain separate, like one who has not touched.

**94.**  The nature of all women is full of defects, and it is difficult to recognize.  It is difficult to cure, and like a confluence, it produces great delusion.

**95.**  A person who acts should consider who is saying what to whom and for what reason.  For one who does this will never be deceived in matters of this world and the next.

**96.**  A wise man should examine the speaker to see if he is speaking truthfully or not.  This can be clearly known by his conduct and knowledge.

**97.**  One who knows policy should first consider whether this is possible or not.  Similarly, before speaking words aimed at a goal, one should examine the speaker's conduct.  Those who act after careful consideration should clearly examine what is said, through words or meaning, to see if it is worthy of belief.

**98.**  A wise man should examine the motives behind what is said: is it said out of fear, affection, greed, envy, anger, shame, ignorance, knowledge, or at the instigation of others?  One who acts in this way will be considered wise among the wise.

They all set out from the city, desiring to accomplish all this.  The Acharya says, "Just as there is certain loss from a Shastra based on violence, from a kingdom devoid of policy, and from austerity practiced on a wrong path, so too there is certain loss from a wicked woman."

Page #442:
---------------------------
414
It is a great hardship that even a virtuous man, when instructed by both the virtuous and the wicked, may err. A wicked woman, due to her nature, does not understand this. ||1.1||
Then, encouraging him, they went to the forest. They showed him the fire pit and said, "Those who jump into it are fearless." ||1.2||
Hearing this, he jumped into the fire pit without fear. A wise man, guided by fate, does not contemplate his actions. ||1.3||
The goddess residing there welcomed him and worshipped him, giving him golden garments and ornaments. He then emerged from the fire pit. ||1.4||
Astonished by this, they took him to another place and encouraged him to enter between two mountains shaped like rams. ||1.5||
The mountains, shaped like rams, were about to fall on him. Seeing him standing firm with his strong arms, the goddess was pleased. ||1.6||
She gave him two divine earrings adorned with makara symbols. Then, following his brothers' instructions, he entered the cave of the Varaha mountain. ||1.7||
A fierce Varaha demon approached him. With one hand, he grabbed the demon's jaw, and with the other, he began to strike his head. He stood playfully between the demon's jaws. ||1.8||
Seeing the extraordinary feat of Rukmini's son, the goddess residing there gave him a conch shell called Vijayaghoṣa and two great nets. Indeed, what benefit is there for those with virtuous souls? ||1.9||
Similarly, he went to the cave called Kala and conquered the demon Mahakal, obtaining from him a chariot called Vṛṣabha and a jeweled armor. ||1.10||
Later, a certain Vidhyadhara had been nailed between two trees by another Vidhyadhara. This was seen by Pradyumna. The nailed Vidhyadhara was suffering unbearable pain. Although he had a ring to release him from his bonds, he could not use it because he was nailed. Seeing him, Pradyumna, the son of Hari, who knew gestures, used his finger to release the ring. ||1.11||
Taking the ring from the nailed Vidhyadhara, he placed it on his eye. He received great merit for this act of kindness. ||1.12||
One should act in this way. A man who acts in this way is considered a scholar even among scholars. ||6-100||
"It is a great hardship that even a virtuous man, when instructed by both the virtuous and the wicked, may err. A wicked woman, due to her nature, does not understand this." ||101||
Then, after that, the five hundred princes, including the prince named Vidyudamṣṭra, encouraged Pradyumna to go to the forest to enjoy themselves. Going there, they showed Pradyumna the fire pit and said, "Those who jump into it are fearless." Hearing this, Pradyumna jumped into the fire pit without fear. It is right, because a wise man, guided by fate, does not contemplate his actions. ||102-103||
As soon as he jumped into the fire pit, the goddess residing there welcomed him and worshipped him, giving him golden garments and ornaments. Thus, worshipped by the goddess, Pradyumna emerged from the fire pit. ||104||
Astonished by this, they took him to another place and encouraged him to enter between two mountains shaped like rams. ||105||
There, two mountains shaped like rams were about to fall on him. Seeing him standing firm with his strong arms, the goddess was pleased. ||106||
She gave him two divine earrings adorned with makara symbols. Then, following his brothers' instructions, he entered the cave of the Varaha mountain. ||107||
A fierce Varaha demon approached him. With one hand, he grabbed the demon's jaw, and with the other, he began to strike his head. He stood playfully between the demon's jaws. ||108||
Seeing the extraordinary feat of Rukmini's son, the goddess residing there gave him a conch shell called Vijayaghoṣa and two great nets. Indeed, what benefit is there for those with virtuous souls? ||109||
Similarly, he went to the cave called Kala and conquered the demon Mahakal, obtaining from him a chariot called Vṛṣabha and a jeweled armor. ||110||
Later, a certain Vidhyadhara had been nailed between two trees by another Vidhyadhara. This was seen by Pradyumna. The nailed Vidhyadhara was suffering unbearable pain. Although he had a ring to release him from his bonds, he could not use it because he was nailed. Seeing him, Pradyumna, the son of Hari, who knew gestures, used his finger to release the ring. ||111||
Taking the ring from the nailed Vidhyadhara, he placed it on his eye. He received great merit for this act of kindness. ||112||
One should act in this way. A man who acts in this way is considered a scholar even among scholars. ||6-100||
"It is a great hardship that even a virtuous man, when instructed by both the virtuous and the wicked, may err. A wicked woman, due to her nature, does not understand this." ||101||

Page #443:
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Seventh Chapter

Surenjjal, Narenjjal, and Prastar, these three vidyas were obtained by Pradyumna from the Vidyaadhar. After that, he went to the abode of the Naga prince Sahasravaktra, where he blew a conch shell. This caused both the Naga and Nagi to emerge from their burrows. They were pleased and gave him a flag marked with a Makara symbol, a bow called Chitravana, a sword called Nandaka, and a ring called Kamaroopini. From there, he went to a Kathka tree and shook it. The goddess residing on it gave him two priceless celestial sandals. 

Then he went to the foot of a tree called Suvarnaarjuna, where he received five arrows named Tapan, Tapana, Modana, Vilapana, and Marana, given by the five-hooded Naga king. After that, he went to Ksheeravana, where the pleased monkey god gave him a crown, a garland of medicinal herbs, an umbrella, and two chamaras. 

Then he went to a well called Kadambamukhi and obtained a Naga-paasha from the deity there. Seeing his growth, all the Vidyaadhar sons could not bear it. They took him to a well called Paatalamukhi and said that whoever jumps into it will become the king of all. Pradyumna, knowing the trick, took the form of the Prajnapti Vidya and jumped into the well, hiding himself and standing there. 

When he realized that they were all going to kill him with large stones, he was filled with anger. He immediately bound his enemies, including Vidhyuddanstra, with the Naga-paasha, hung them upside down in the well, and covered them with a stone. Among all his brothers, Jyotishprabha was the youngest. Pradyumna sent him to the city to inform everyone and sat on the stone himself. It is right, for sinners always face defeat due to their own sins. 

Then Pradyumna saw Narada, who moved according to his will, coming from the sky towards him. He stood up to greet him, worshipped him according to the rituals, and spoke to him. Narada narrated the whole story to him. Hearing this, Pradyumna was very...

Page #444:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, the Uttara Purana, is a testament to the true faith. Seeing the arrival of the enemy forces, he was filled with joy and sat down. Seeing the arrival of the enemy forces, he was astonished.  Then, just as a cluster of clouds surrounds the sun during the rainy season, the army of the Vidhyadhara king suddenly surrounded Pradyumna. But Pradyumna fought and defeated all the Vidhyadharas, including Kalasambara.  After that, he told the king Kalasambara the whole story of his sons, removed the stone and the serpent's noose, and freed them all. He also explained the reason for Narada's arrival in detail.  Then, with the permission of King Kalasambara, he boarded the chariot named Vrishabha and set out for Narada.  On the way, he listened to the story of his past lives told by Narada and reached Hastinapur.  There, King Duryodhana had a beautiful daughter named Udhadhikumari, born to his queen Jaladhi.  A grand coronation ceremony was being held for Bhanukumar.  Seeing this, Pradyumna used his stone magic to cover Narada with a stone on the chariot itself, and he himself got down from the chariot and came down to the earth.  He laughed at them in many ways and moved on.  128-136.  As he was walking, he reached the outskirts of Mathura, where the Pandavas were going to give their beloved daughter Bhanukumar to him.  Seeing them, he took a bow in his hand, assumed the form of a hunter, and ridiculed them in many ways.  Then he left from there and reached Dwaraka.  137-138.  There, he kept Narada on the chariot as before, using his magic, and he himself came down alone.  There, he assumed the form of a monkey using his magic and destroyed the forest of Satyabhama, which was like the Nandan forest, and filled his water pot with all the water from the well there.  Then, going a little further, he yoked a donkey and a camel to his chariot, and he himself assumed a magical form.  139-141.  By this act, he made the people coming and going through the city gate laugh heartily.  Then he entered the city.  142.  And using his magic, he assumed the form of a physician named Sala and began to announce that he knew how to join broken ears, etc.

Page #445:
---------------------------
The 72nd chapter

The maidens were brought to present to Bhanukumara. He then displayed many kinds of laughter towards them. Thereafter, in the guise of a Brahmin, he went to Satyabhama's palace. During the time of the meal, he expelled the Brahmins who had come there and, by his audacity, ate the food and accepted the dakshina.

Then, in the guise of a ksullaka (mendicant), he approached his mother Rukmini and said, "O one who has attained right perception! I am hungry, please feed me properly." After begging for various foods, he ate but did not attain satisfaction. Then, expressing his distress, he said, "O Devi! Make me content, fill my belly." Thereafter, by consuming the great modaka (sweet), he became satisfied. Sitting there comfortably, he was somewhat peaceful.

At that time, Rukmini saw that the champaka and ashoka flowers had blossomed untimely, and the entire forest was resounding with the melodious songs of the bees and cuckoos. Amazed, she joyfully asked, "O gentle one! Are you my son Narada-spoken-of-in-time?" Hearing her question, Pradyumna revealed his true form, placing the garland of his mother's toenail rays on his head, and narrated his entire story to her. He dined with his mother and, through various childlike plays, attained the highest joy from her, as if established in the emergence of the extraordinary merit acquired in a previous birth.

At that time, a barber came to Rukmini and said, "O Devi! At the question of Lord Hari, it was known that the birth of your son and Satyabhama's son occurred together. You both had made an agreement that whichever of you had a son first, that son would, at the time of his marriage, steal the hair of the other's head and bathe. Therefore, O Devi, give me that (hair) for the bathing of Bhanukumara." Hearing this, Pradyumna asked, "What is this?" Rukmini replied, "You and Bhanukumara were born together. We had sent you both to be shown to Lord Krishna, but at that time he was sleeping, so you were placed near his feet. And he...

Page #446:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Hari, awakening, established himself at the head. Seeing your seniority, he gave it to you, and your mother ran to you. ||159|| He made the barber a vessel of deformities, and he hung the servants who had come upside down in the gate below. ||160|| He terrified the jester in the form of Vasudeva, and he greatly intimidated Jara, the doorkeeper, with his elongated feet. ||161|| He knocked down his grandfather in the form of a ram, and swallowing Balabhadra, he became Hari and made himself invisible. ||162|| Going to his mother, he said, "Enjoy yourself here," and with his knowledge, he assumed the beautiful form of Rukmini, indistinguishable from her. ||163|| Placing her in the chariot, he quickly went to the strong Hari, who had come to take her away, like Yama who had come untimely. ||164|| Having conquered Krishna with the magic of the Narendra Jala, he stood without an opponent, a formidable figure with a keen gaze. ||165|| Narada came and said to Balabhadra and Krishna, laughing, "Today you are seeing the son who has acquired many skills." ||166|| Then, revealing his true form, he bowed his head to the lotus feet of Balabhadra and Krishna, saying, "Five arrows are my strength." ||167|| Then, the Chakra-bearer, Ananga, embraced Pradyumna with love, placed him on the back of his elephant, and joyfully entered the city. ||168|| With the girls chosen by Satyabhama's son, Kama, the god of love, happily obtained a marriage with Kalyana, approved by all. ||169|| Thus, time passed happily. One day, it was heard that Pradyumna's brother from his previous birth would come from heaven and become Krishna's son. Hearing this, Satyabhama begged her husband, "May that son be born to me." ||170-171|| When Rukmini heard this, she respectfully said to Pradyumna, "Try to get your younger brother from your previous birth for Jambavati." ||172|| Pradyumna also, according to Jambavati's wish,

Page #447:
---------------------------
The 27th Chapter
416
Jambavati gave birth to a son named Shambhava, who was born from the heavens. Satyabhāmā also gave birth to a son named Subhānu. Both of them were envious of each other. || 174 ||
In the Gandharva and other disputes, Shambhava defeated Subhānu. The victory of those who have accumulated merit in their previous lives is never difficult. || 175 ||
Rukmini and Satyabhāmā, having abandoned their envy, became friendly with each other. || 176 ||
Hearing all this, the entire assembly bowed down to the lotus feet of the king, who was adorned with a crown. || 177 ||
Then, on another day, with folded hands, the Jina, Neminātha, bowed down to Balarama, whose mind was filled with love for Hari. || 178 ||
"O Bhagavan, how long will the prosperous and unhindered kingdom of Vasudeva last? Please tell me this." || 179 ||
"O Blessed one, after twelve years, this city of Dvāravati will be destroyed by Dvīpāyana, who will be consumed by the effects of alcohol. Jaratkumāra will cause the death of Krishna. He will be born in the first land with the lifespan of an ocean, and then, leaving that place, he will become a Tirthankara in this Bharat Kshetra. You will also grieve for six months due to his separation. Then, after the enlightenment of Siddhartha, you will abandon all sorrow, take initiation, and become a deva in the Mahendra heaven. || 180-183 ||
There, you will enjoy the pleasures of life for seven oceans' worth of lifespan, and then, becoming a Tirthankara in this Bharat Kshetra, you will burn away the enemies of karma and be liberated from the body." || 184 ||
Hearing this instruction from the Tirthankara, Dvīpāyana immediately took sannyasa and went to another country. Jaratkumāra went to the forest of Kaushambi. Krishna, who had already bound himself to the hellish lifespan, obtained right vision and contemplated the sixteen causes of the sixteen karmas, which were the cause of his Tirthankara nature. He declared to all, including women and children, "I am not capable of taking initiation, but I do not prevent those who are capable." || 185-187 ||
Hearing this, the sons, including Pradyumna, and the wives, including Rukmini, asked Krishna, the Chakravarti, and their other relatives, and then took sannyasa. || 188 ||

Page #448:
---------------------------
## The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

**Verse 189:**
Following the teachings of Dwipayana, Jambavati's son, Aniruddha, the son of Kama, attained self-control.

**Verse 190:**
Along with the sage Pradyumna, he ascended the three peaks of the mountain, becoming a holder of the image yoga.

**Verse 191:**
Completing the white meditation, the three of them destroyed their destructive karma and attained the ninefold liberation, achieving liberation.

**Verse 192:**
Led by the Dharmachakra held by the Yaksha who proclaims merit, with a place for placing the feet, and seven lotuses in front and behind,

**Verse 193:**
Adorned with the umbrella of Jagannatha and other divine attributes, followed by all the celestial beings who travel on the path of the wind,

**Verse 194:**
Followed by people who are not to be disobeyed, walking on the path of the earth, with the dust and thorns removed by the wind gods,

**Verse 195:**
With the earth made beautiful by the fragrant water showered by the cloud gods, thus, possessing many wonders and captivating the minds of all beings,

**Verse 196:**
The Jinesvara, showering the nectar of Dharma, traveled through all the lands and arrived in the Pallava country.

**Verse 197:**
Here, a brief account of the Pandavas is given, due to the fear of the length of the text and the limitations of the lifespan and intellect of the timid.

**Verse 198:**
In the city of Kampilya, the king Drupada ruled. His queen was Dridharatha, and their daughter was Draupadi.

**Verse 199:**
She was blessed with all the qualities of womanhood and was beloved by all. Seeing her in the fullness of her youth, her father asked his ministers, "To whom should this daughter be given?"

**Verse 200:**
Asked about this daughter, the ministers, after deliberation, said, "She should be given to the mighty Pandavas."

**Verse 201:**
Due to their innate enmity, the king Duryodhana, with a scheme, caused the Pandavas to enter the Lakshagriha (house of lac).

**Verse 202:**
Knowing that he intended to kill them, the Pandavas, guided by their own merit, escaped from the Lakshagriha and went to another country through a tunnel.

**Verse 203:**
The Pandavas, due to their relationship and the pain of their suffering, followed the teachings and embraced self-control.

Page #449:
---------------------------
The 27th Chapter

In the city of Podanapura, the king Chandradashanamahipati and his queen Devila had a son named Indravarma, who was skilled in all arts and qualities. [204] The Pandavas, having defeated and killed Sthugagandha, gave him the kingdom. [205] The news reached the Pandavas that Indravarma was pleased with them. [206] The Pandavas decided that they should definitely come here and that Draupadi's Swayamvara should be held, as there would be no opposition from anyone. [207] In the spring, the king built a Swayamvara pavilion. All the kings came there, including the Pandavas. [208] Bhima was known for his cooking and his ability to subdue a maddened elephant with his bare hands. Arjuna was famous for his skill in archery and his ability to pierce a fish with an arrow. [209] The other Pandavas were recognized by the arrival of Narada. [210] When all the kings were assembled in the Swayamvara pavilion, Draupadi, adorned with jewels, entered the pavilion. [211] The purohit, Siddhartha, described the lineage, qualities, and virtues of each king in turn. [212] Draupadi, adorned with a garland of flowers, honored Arjuna by passing him the garland. [213] The kings of the Kuru dynasty, descended from the lineage of the Pandavas, and other kings were pleased, saying, "This is a suitable match." [214] Thus, having achieved many auspicious things, the Pandavas returned to their city and spent a long time in happiness, making it seem like a moment. [215] After that, Arjuna had a son named Abhimanyu with Subhadra, and Draupadi had five sons named Panchala. [216] Here, Yudhishthira played dice with the king Duryodhana. The killing of the Kichakas in the city of Bhujangasail, the Pandavas living in the service of King Virat of Viratnagar, Arjuna's retrieval of King Virat's large herd of cows, and the retrieval of a smaller herd of cows by Arjuna's younger brothers, Sahadeva and Nakula, are events that should be narrated in detail by those who know the Puranas, as per the scriptures. [217] Then, in the Kurukshetra war, the Pandavas fought against the Kauravas. Having defeated the king Duryodhana, the Pandavas...

Page #450:
---------------------------
422
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, Yudhisthira became the ruler of the entire realm. He divided the wealth with his brothers and made everyone happy. || 219 || Thus, all of them experienced the fruition of their good deeds, enjoying complete happiness without any anxiety. || 220 || Then, as foretold in Dwaravati by the Jina, the death of Krishna in the forest of Kaushambi by Jaratkumara and the practice of austerity by his elder brother Balarama took place. || 221 || The Jinas, who are not liars, have spoken the truth, and all that was foretold in Dwaravati has come to pass. || 222 || Such was the fate of those who committed evil deeds. Wise men, therefore, eradicate such karmas from their roots. || 223 || Hearing all this, the Pandavas, the lords of Mathura, became deeply distressed by the separation from their lord and brother, and renounced their kingdom. || 224 || Embarking on the great journey of liberation, they reached the Jina, Neminath, and performed all the appropriate rituals with devotion. || 225 || Fearing the cycle of birth and death, they inquired about their past lives. The Lord, the possessor of infinite glory, replied as follows: || 226 || On the island of Jambudvipa, in the land of Bharata, in the Anga region, there was a city called Champa. There, a Kuru king named Meghavahana ruled. || 227 || In that city, there lived a Brahmin named Somadeva, whose wife was Somila. They had three sons: Somadatta, Somila, and Somabhuti, all of whom were learned in the Vedas and great Brahmins. || 228 || These three brothers had a maternal uncle named Agnibhuti, who had three daughters named Dhanashri, Mitrashri, and Nagashri, born to his wife Agnilaya. || 229 || Agnibhuti and Amila gave these three daughters, who were blessed with auspicious signs, to their nephews in the order of their birth. || 230 || Somadeva, a wise man, renounced the world for some reason and embraced the path of Jainism. || 231 || One day, while he was at home, he saw a Jain monk named Dharmaruchi entering his house. Moved by compassion, Somadatta welcomed him and said to his younger brother's wife, "O Nagashri, offer him alms with great respect." || 232 || Nagashri thought to herself, "He always sends me to do everything." Filled with anger, she gave the monk poisoned food. || 233 || The monk, having accepted the food, renounced the world and worshipped the Lord, attaining liberation. || 234 ||

Page #451:
---------------------------
## The 27th Chapter

423

Knowing of Nagashri's wicked deed, her brothers, the protectors, approached Varunarya and took the liberating initiation. || 215 ||

Seeing this, the other two Brahmani, abandoning Nagashri, also took the vow of restraint near Gunavati Aryika. This is the nature of the virtuous and the wicked. || 236 ||

Thus, these five beings, at the end of their lifespan, worshipped the four objects of worship and became Samanik Devas in the Aran and Achyut heavens, with a lifespan of twenty-two Sagaras. || 237 ||

They enjoyed pleasures there for a long time, with full awareness. Meanwhile, Nagashri, due to her sins, went to the fifth hell. After experiencing the suffering there, she was released at the end of her lifespan and was reborn as a venomous snake named Drishtivisha on the Swayamprabha island. Then, after dying, she went to the second hell, where she suffered for the duration of three Sagaras. After being released, she wandered in the Tras and Sthavar yonis for two Sagaras. Thus, wandering in the ocean of existence, when her sins subsided, she was born as a Chandali in the city of Champapur. || 238-241 ||

One day, she went to the Muni Raja named Samadhigupta, bowed to him, listened to the Dharma, and renounced meat and honey. Due to this, after dying, she was born in the same city as the daughter of a wealthy woman named Dhandevi, the wife of Subandhu Seth. She had a very foul-smelling body. Her parents named her 'Sukumari', a meaningful name. In the same city, there lived a wealthy man named Dhanadatta, who had two sons named Jindeva and Jindatta with his wife Ashokadatta. Jindeva's relatives wanted to arrange his marriage with Sukumari. But when Jindeva learned about this, he was disgusted by Sukumari's foul smell and became a disciple of Muni Raja named Suvrata, taking initiation from him. || 242-246 ||

After this, his younger brother Jindatta was repeatedly urged by his relatives, saying that it is not right to insult the daughter of a noble family. Fearing this, he married her, but he never went near her, even in his dreams, like a venomous snake. Thus, due to her husband's aversion, Sukumari constantly lamented her lack of virtue. || 247-248 ||

One day, she fasted. On that day, she...

Page #452:
---------------------------
424
The Mahapurana and the Uttara Purana, these two have been initiated. Why? This is the question. Then, the Sayika said, "O, Shanti, the auspicious one! Listen, in a previous birth, these two were the beloved wives of the king of the Saudharma heaven, Vimala and Suprabha. They went to the Nandishvara island with the Saudharma king to worship the Jina. There, their minds became detached, and they decided to take birth as humans in this cycle and perform austerities. After their life ended, they were born as the daughters of King Shrishena of Saketa, from his queen Shrikant, named Harishena and Shrishena. When they reached their youth, they were standing inside the mandap of their Swayamvara marriage. Then, they remembered their previous birth and the vows they had made. At that moment, they renounced their family and all the princes and took initiation. Hearing the words of Shanti, Sukumari became detached and, with the consent of her family, took initiation from the same Sayika. On another day, a prostitute named Vasantasena came to the forest, surrounded by many men who were begging her. Seeing this, Sukumari thought, "May I also attain such good fortune." At the end of her life, she was reborn as the wife of Somabhuti, a Brahmin who had become a god in the Achyuta heaven due to his austerities. 
They lived a life of excellence there. After their life ended, those three brothers were reborn as you, the three jewels, the embodiment of great deeds: Yudhishthira, Bhima, and Arjuna. The souls of Dhanashri and Mitrashri were reborn as Nakula and Sahadeva, the embodiment of praiseworthy valor. Their radiance is like that of the moon and the sun. Sukumari's soul was reborn as Draupadi, the daughter of King Drupada and Queen Dridharatha of Kampilya. Hearing this account of their past lives from the Nemishvara, the Pandavas, along with many others, took to restraint. This is the true bond of the virtuous. Kunti, Subhadra, and Draupadi, adorned with the ornaments of virtue, also took the highest initiation from the Rajimati Ganini. Finally, the souls of all three were born in the sixteenth heaven and, after their life ended, they were freed from all karmic impurities and attained liberation.

Page #453:
---------------------------
## The 27th Chapter

The Vishvakarmas, freed from their impurities, will undoubtedly attain liberation. The five Pandavas, devoted to the welfare of Nemiswami, are all righteous. || 266 ||

Having enjoyed their devotional practices, they all reached the mountain, Shrutajaya, and settled there, engaged in the Attapana Yoga. || 267 ||

Seeing them, the cruel Kuryavara, the nephew of the Kaurava king, remembering the murder of his uncle, was filled with rage. || 268 ||

He placed on their bodies the heated iron crowns and other ornaments, which were the marks of their sins. || 269 ||

The sons of Kunti, taking refuge in the Kshatriya order, burned their karmic fuel with the fire of pure meditation and attained liberation. || 270 ||

Nakula and Sahadeva ascended the Sarvarthasiddhi Vimana. The Bhattaraka also reached the mountain, Shrutajaya. || 271 ||

They spent six hundred ninety-nine years, nine months, and four days in their wanderings. Then, abandoning their wanderings, they practiced Yoga Nirodha for one month with five hundred thirty-three monks. On the seventh day of the bright fortnight of Ashadha, in the Chitra constellation, at the beginning of the night, they destroyed their four destructive karmas and attained liberation. || 272-274 ||

At that time, Indra and the other gods, having reached the fifth auspicious event, celebrated it with due devotion and then returned to their respective abodes. || 275 ||

The garland-wearer, Indra, descended from the sky with his celestial entourage, their vehicles far away. They quickly bowed their heads, their mouths filled with praises, their hands clasped in reverence, their minds fixed on him, their hearts free from darkness. They bowed to his feet, the glorious Nemiswami, who destroys the darkness of ignorance and brings about the knowledge of the ultimate reality. || 276 ||

**Shārdūlavikrīḍita**

In the fourth Kalpa, the fearless king, Achyutendra, was born from the previous Tirthankara. From him was born the righteous king, Jayanta, the glorious moon of the Harikula lineage, the Jina. || 277 ||

They will attain liberation. The five Pandavas, who have received many excellent and supreme riches and are filled with great devotion, wandered with Neminatha Bhagavan for many years. Finally, they reached the Shrutajaya mountain and settled there, engaged in the Attapana Yoga. By divine chance, the nephew of Duryodhana, Kuryavara, arrived there. He was extremely wicked. Seeing the Pandavas, he remembered the murder of his uncle, and filled with rage, he placed heated iron crowns and other ornaments on their bodies, which were the marks of their sins. Of the five brothers, the sons of Kunti, Yudhishthira, Bhima, and Arjuna, ascended the Kshatriya order and burned their karmic fuel with the fire of pure meditation, attaining liberation. Nakula and Sahadeva were born in the Sarvarthasiddhi Vimana. Meanwhile, Bhattaraka Neminatha Swami also reached the Girnar mountain and settled there. || 260-271 ||

They spent six hundred ninety-nine years, nine months, and four days in their wanderings. Then, abandoning their wanderings, they practiced Yoga Nirodha for one month with five hundred thirty-three monks. On the seventh day of the bright fortnight of Ashadha, in the Chitra constellation, at the beginning of the night, they destroyed their four destructive karmas and attained liberation. || 272-274 ||

At that time, Indra and the other gods, having reached the fifth auspicious event, celebrated it with due devotion and then returned to their respective abodes. || 275 ||

1. Abode.

54

425

Those who descended from the sky from afar in their own chariots, who quickly bowed their heads, whose mouths were filled with praises, who clasped their hands in reverence, and whose minds were completely steady, Indra and the other great gods, who bow to his feet, who have destroyed all the darkness of the heart with their brilliance, such glorious Neminatha Bhagavan, may he quickly bring about our welfare for the attainment of omniscience. || 276 ||

Shri Nemiswami.

Page #454:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**426**

**Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana**

That Lakshmi, whose lotus feet were worshipped by all the gods, went to the abode of the great one. That was his childhood, whose beauty was boundless, and that was the princess who was praised by all. The wise one, considering all this as withered grass, embraced restraint. What reason is there why the Lord Nemishvara should not adorn the wheel of Dharma, revolving around him? || 278 ||

The soul of Baldeva was first Subhanu, then a god in the first heaven, from there he fell and became the king of the Vidyadharas, then he became a god in the fourth heaven, after that he was a merchant named Shankha, then he became a god in the Maha-Shukra heaven, then he was the ninth Balabhadra, then he became a god, and finally he will become a Tirthankara. || 279 ||

The soul of Krishna was first Amrita-rasayana, then he went to the third hell, after that he wandered through the ocean of existence and became a householder named Yaksha, then he was a prince named Nirnama, then he became a god, and after that he became the Lord Krishna, the master of the Chakra, who killed his enemy Jarasandha, due to his bad karma. After that, he is experiencing great suffering, born in the first hell, and finally, he will emerge from there and become a Tirthankara, destroying all evil. || 280-281 ||

1. Mansapachana is a Chandala.

Page #455:
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Seven

**Verse 282:** Do not even slightly harm the ascetics who have renounced all attachments, for they are free from evil thoughts.

**Verse 283:** Just as a lion kills a deer, so did Hari kill Chanura. Just as a thunderbolt shatters Kansa, so did He shatter Kansa. Just as death takes away a child, so did He defeat Shishupala in battle. How can such a glorious being not be considered the greatest among men?

**Verse 284:** Just as a lion roars after conquering a powerful elephant, so did Krishna roar after conquering Jarasandha, the ocean of strength. He conquered all his enemies and became the conqueror of the world. Just as He protected the cows in His childhood, so did He protect the three-part, undivided land with only a staff in His hand in His youth. Therefore, He is called a Gop (protector of the earth).

**Verse 285:** Look, on the one hand, Krishna obtained extraordinary wealth by destroying all His enemies. On the other hand, He was completely destroyed in a desolate forest, separated from the entire world. This is just, for in this world, everyone receives what they deserve according to their actions. Indeed, the wheel of existence keeps turning like the spokes of a wheel.

**Verse 286:** Look, Krishna, having killed the demon Ayura, became the king of the Yadavas. From that time onwards, the burden of the kingdom fell upon Him. Therefore, those who are wise should strive to maintain their unbroken connection with the Supreme Being, for they are constantly seeking happiness.

**Commentary:** In His lifetime, Krishna was betrayed by a Chandala in the presence of the ascetics. Therefore, he went to hell due to his evil thoughts. However, through penance, he attained the wealth of the kingdom and ultimately met his destruction. Therefore, the Acharya says, "Do not even slightly harm the ascetics who have renounced all attachments, for they are free from evil thoughts."

Page #456:
---------------------------
## Chapter 72: The Purana of the Cycle of Kings

**Verse 287:**  This lineage of Tirthankaras, the lineage of Brahma, the Lord of the Earth, and the lineage of Chudadevi, the queen, gave rise to Brahmadatta, the king of the treasury.

**Verse 288:**  He was the twelfth Chakravarti, known as Saptachapa (Seven Bows), with a lifespan of seven hundred years. He was the last of the Chakravartis, after him there were no more.

**Commentary:**  The wise ones, if you desire happiness, then strive constantly to avoid the binding of karmas. Always be mindful of not accumulating negative karmas.

**Explanation:**  In the Tirthankara of  Neminath, Brahmadatta, the twelfth Chakravarti, was born. He was the son of King Brahma and Queen Chudadevi. His body was seven bows tall and he lived for seven hundred years. He was the last of the Chakravartis, after him there were no more.

**Conclusion:**  Thus ends the seventy-second chapter of the Trishatilak Mahapurana, composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya, which narrates the Puranas of Neminath Tirthankara, Padma, the Balabhadra, Krishna, the Ardhachakravarti, Jarasandha, the Prativaasudeva, and Brahmadatta, the Chakravarti.

Page #457:
---------------------------
## The Thirty-Seventh Chapter

"May Parshvanatha, who is as great as the earth, protect us. He alone has forbidden the holding of a parasol by Dharanendra and Padmavati, who were devoted to him." (1)

"Your Dharma, like a white umbrella, casts a shadow over the entire world. Yet, surprisingly, some are still scorched by the sun of sin." (2)

"The wise hear your divine voice, which transforms into all languages, is truthful, and benefits all. The wicked never hear it." (3)

"O Lord! The greatness of other Tirthankaras is not revealed, but yours is abundantly clear. Therefore, your story deserves to be told well." (4)

"O Lord! Your Dharma-filled story, which removes the wrong path and spreads the right path, must be told for the sake of the blessed souls who are destined for liberation." (5)

"In the Jambudvipa, in the southern Bharata Kshetra, there is a vast and beautiful country called Suramya. In it lies the large city of Podanapura." (6)

"In that city, ruled a king named Aravinda, renowned for his valor and other virtues. His people were as happy under his rule as they would be under the rule of the Lord Adinatha, the first Tirthankara." (7)

"In the same city, lived a Brahmin named Vishvabhuta, well-versed in the Vedas and scriptures. His wife, Anundhari, was like another Veda, bringing him joy." (8)

"These two had two sons, Kamatha and Marubhuta, who were like poison and nectar, or like sin and virtue." (9)

"Varuna was the wife of Kamatha, and Vasundhari was the wife of Marubhuta. Both were ministers of the king, with Marubhuta being the younger and more knowledgeable in matters of policy." (10)

Page #458:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the virtuous conduct of the righteous is described as a treasure for the earth. The wicked Kamatha killed Marubhuti. 

Marubhuti, after his death, became the elephant Vajraghoṣa in the vast Sallaki forest in the Malaya region. Varuna, after her death, became the she-elephant in the same forest and became fond of Vajraghoṣa. They spent a long time together in that forest, enjoying each other's company.

King Aravindu, renouncing his kingdom and becoming a monk, set out for Sammed Shikhar with the Sangha to attain liberation. While traveling through the forest, he reached the place where the Samayika was to be performed. He sat down in meditation, as is the duty of a virtuous person.

Seeing him, the mighty elephant, whose temples and forehead were dripping with intoxication, became enraged and charged towards Aravindu, who was performing the Samayika. But seeing the mark of the Vatsa on his chest, he was reminded of his past life.

Remembering their past friendship, the elephant stood still. Even animals show kindness to their relatives.

The elephant, having understood the true nature of Dharma from the monk, took the vows of a Shravaka, including fasting and other observances.

From that time onwards, the elephant, fearing sin, ate only dry leaves and branches broken by other elephants. He drank only water that had accumulated in puddles formed by the impact of stones or the movement of elephants. He observed the fast and performed the Parana.

After performing austerities for a long time, the elephant, weakened and exhausted, went to the Vegavati river to drink water. He fell into the mud and, despite his efforts, could not get out.

At that time, the wicked Kamatha, who had died and become a snake, bit the elephant, causing his death. He was reborn in the Sahasrar heaven, where he lived for sixteen oceans of years.

After enjoying the pleasures of that heaven, he was reborn in the Pushkalavati region of the Videha country in this Jambudvipa.

Page #459:
---------------------------
## The Thirty-Seventh Parva

531

In the city of Trilokottama, situated on the Vijayā mountain, there lived a king named Vidyadgati and his queen, Vidyānmālā. They had a son named Rashmivega, who was wise and had reached the end of his lifespan.  [26]

Having attained full youth, Rashmivega embraced the path of renunciation, taking initiation from the Muni Samādhigupta and observing the most excellent fasts, including the Sarvatobhadra. [27-28]

One day, while engaged in yoga in a cave on the Himagiri mountain, he was encountered by the sinful Dhūmaprabha, who had emerged from the torments of the Kukkuṭa-sarpa hell, where he had been reborn as a serpent after biting the elephant Vajraghoṣa. [29]

Enraged at the sight of the Muni, the serpent swallowed him whole. The Muni's soul, however, was reborn as a deva in the Puṣkara vimāna of the Acyuta heaven, where he lived for twenty-two oceans of years. [30]

At the end of his lifespan, this virtuous soul was reborn as the son of the king Vajravīrya and queen Vijayā in the Padma country, a part of the Videha region in the western Jambudvīpa. He was named Vajranābhi. [31-32]

Vajranābhi, protected by his good karma, enjoyed the unbroken fortune of a Chakravartin, but remained unsatisfied. He desired to attain the fortune of liberation. [33]

He drank the nectar of Dharma, flowing from the lotus-mouth of the Bhattaraka Kṣemaṅkara, and renounced all desires for worldly pleasures. [34]

Having established his son on the throne, he renounced his kingdom and embraced the path of renunciation, practicing compassion for all beings. [35]

The being who had been the serpent was reborn in the sixth hell, where he suffered for twenty-two oceans of years. [36]

After a long time, he was reborn as a hunter named Kuraṅga in the forest. He terrified all the creatures born in that forest. [37]

One day, the Chakravartin Vajranābhi, who was strong in body and attached to his physical form, abandoned his meditation and was basking in the sun in the forest. [38]

Seeing him, the sinful hunter, filled with hatred, inflicted many unbearable torments upon the Muni, like a coward. [39]

The Muni's soul, however, entered into Dharma-meditation and worshipped the Supreme Being. He was reborn as a being in the middle category of the Sahaṅgama-madhyama. [40]

**Notes:**

* The text contains some inconsistencies in the Sanskrit verses, which have been corrected in the translation.
* The terms "ocean of years" and "Sahaṅgama-madhyama" are specific to Jain cosmology.
* The story highlights the cyclical nature of karma and the importance of renunciation for liberation.

Page #460:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, it is said that the great king Ananda, who enjoyed divine pleasures for twenty-seven Sagaras, was born in Ayodhya, the capital of the Kosala kingdom, in the Ikshvaku dynasty, descended from Kashyapa. He was the son of King Vajra Bahu and Queen Prabhankari.  

One day, following the advice of his chief minister, Swamihita, King Ananda organized a grand puja during the eight days of the Vasant (Spring) season.  

The great sage Vipulamati, known for his vast wisdom, arrived to witness the puja. King Ananda, with great humility, bowed to the sage and listened to his teachings on the true nature of Dharma, which brings happiness to all beings.  

Then, the king asked the sage, "O revered one, I have a doubt. The image of the Jina is inanimate, devoid of the power to inflict or bestow favors. How then does the worship of such an image bring merit to the devotees?"

The sage replied, "O King, listen! Though the image of the Jina and the Jina temple are inanimate, they are the cause of the binding of merit for the worthy souls.  The binding of merit actually arises from the consequences, and the Jina's image and temple are the cause of those consequences.  

The Jina is free from all vices like attachment, aversion, and delusion. He is detached from scriptures, ornaments, and other worldly things. His face shines like the radiant moon. He is the knower of all worlds, both material and spiritual. He has achieved his goal and is free from all attachments, including his hair. He is the Supreme Soul.  

Therefore, those who see the Jina's temple and his image experience a great increase in auspicious consequences, which cannot be achieved through any other means.  

All actions arise from both internal and external causes. Therefore, it is important to understand that the Jina's image is the cause of the auspicious consequences that arise from the binding of merit."

As the sage was giving this discourse, he wished to describe the form of the Jina temples in the three worlds. He began by describing the magnificent Jina temple located in the sun's chariot.  

Hearing this extraordinary description, King Ananda was filled with great faith. From that day onwards, he would offer his prayers to the Jina, with folded hands, at the beginning and end of each day, praising the Jina with a humble heart, as the sun shone in the sky.

Page #461:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

**433**

The king, having caused a sun-chariot to be made by artisans, adorned with jewels and gold, with a palace of the Jina Lord at its center, extending far and wide. || 57 ||

He performed an eight-day worship according to the scriptures, with devotion, with four faces, a chariot-like form, and the greatest Sarvatobhadra, and a Kalpavriksha that granted wishes to the poor. || 58 ||

Seeing this, all the people, due to its authenticity, began to praise it themselves. || 59 ||

With devotion, they began to praise the circle of the radiant sun. From that time onwards, in this world, the worship of the sun became prevalent. || 60 ||

Then, one day, the wise king Anand saw a white hair on his head, which split the hearts of those seeking youth in two. || 61 ||

Driven by this, he gave his kingdom to his eldest son with an abhisheka, and, renouncing worldly desires, he practiced austerities near the Muni Raja, Samudra Gupta. || 62 ||

Along with many kings, he abandoned his royal nature and, with a good Leshya, he practiced the fourfold worship. || 63 ||

He purified himself through the eleven Angas, contemplated the sixteen causes of the karma of the Tirthankaras, and, having contemplated the sixteen causes of the karma of the Tirthankaras as described in the scriptures, he bound the karma of the Tirthankara, a virtuous nature. He practiced severe austerities for a long time. || 64 ||

At the end, with a completely peaceful inner self, he, the wise one, attained the state of Praayopagama, and, free from anxiety, he resided in the Kshiravana, absorbed in the meditation of the Dharma. || 65 ||

Kamatha, a former sinner, who had fallen into hell, became a lion in that forest and seized the throat of the Muni. || 67 ||

He endured this attack of the lion, and, possessing the wealth of the fourfold worship, he became an Indra in the Achyuta heaven, in the chariot of the life-giving one. || 68 ||

There, he had a lifespan of twenty oceans, a body three and a half cubits tall, a white Leshya, he breathed after ten months, and he consumed mental ambrosia after twenty thousand years. He had mental sexual intercourse with women, his knowledge of perception extended to the fifth earth, and his radiance, power, and strength extended that far. All the gods, such as Samanika, worshipped him, and he was a mine of happiness, produced by many goddesses who granted wishes. Thus, he enjoyed all worldly pleasures...

Page #462:
---------------------------
434
... In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, he continuously experienced the worldly pleasures and remained attached to them, playfully passing time like an art. || 66-73 || When the last six months of his life remained and he was about to come to this earth, at that time, in the Kashi country of the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa, there was a city called Banaras. In it, King Vishvasena of the Kashyapa gotra ruled. His queen's name was Brahmi. The gods had showered her with a stream of jewels and worshipped her. Queen Brahmi, on the second day of the Krishna Paksha of Vaisakha, in the morning, saw sixteen auspicious dreams in the Visakha Nakshatra, and after that, she saw an elephant entering her mouth-lotus. Her eyes opened at the sound of the drums beating in the morning, and she went to the king, satisfied and adorned with auspicious blessings, as if the moonlit night had gone to the moon. || 74-78 || With respect, she sat on the half of the king's throne and began to tell him all the dreams she had seen in order. || 79 || King Vishvasena was a knower of the future, so he heard the dreams and began to tell their fruits. He said that from seeing the elephant, he would have a son, from seeing the bull, he would be the lord of the three worlds, from seeing the lion, he would be the holder of infinite strength, from seeing the anointing of Lakshmi, he would get the anointing on Mount Meru, from seeing two garlands, he would be the one who would initiate the householder dharma and the muni dharma, from seeing the moon, he would be the moon of the three worlds, from seeing the sun, he would be radiant, from seeing a pair of fish, he would be happy, from seeing a pot, he would be the lord of treasures, from seeing a lake, he would be endowed with all auspicious signs, from seeing the ocean, he would be omniscient, from seeing the throne, he would be worshipped by all people, from seeing the aircraft, he would be the one who descended from heaven, from seeing the abode of the Nagendra, he would be the holder of the three knowledges, from seeing a heap of jewels, he would be adorned with virtues, from seeing a smokeless fire, he would be the one who burns sins, and O Krishodari! from seeing the elephant entering the mouth-lotus, it is indicated that the son who is worshipped by the gods, who is the destroyer of the enemy, has today entered your womb. Thus, she, with deer-like eyes, was very pleased to hear the fruits of the dreams from her husband. || 80-87 ||
1. Achchetsiit M., Ti. || Kalamalammaitkalayan L. (1) || 2. Brahmasya L. || 3. Vilokani L. || 4. Pushti: Gho, Go. || 5. 'Rajanam nripan chandram va. Raja prabhau nripe chandre yakshe kshastriyashkraayo: ' iti kosha' || 6. Vistaraadha L. || 7. Svarga Kho. || 8. Lingato L. ||

Page #463:
---------------------------
## The Thirty-Seventh Chapter

**435** Then all the Indra's gathered together and celebrated the auspicious coronation of the parents of the Tirthankara with great joy at the time of their descent from heaven. **88** At that time, the royal palace of King Vishvasena was surpassing even heaven with its wealth. What good fortune does not come to the gathering of virtuous souls? **89** When nine months were complete, on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of the month of Pausha, in the Anil Yoga, a son was born. **90** At that time, all the Indras, starting with Saudharma, knowing the rise of the Tirthankara from the trembling of their thrones, came to the summit of Mount Mandara. **91** After the completion of the birth, coronation, and auspicious worship, the parents named him Parth and dedicated him to them. **92** After the passing of eighty-three thousand seven hundred and fifty years from the time of Lord Neminatha, Lord Parshvanatha, the conqueror of death, was born. **93** His lifespan was one hundred years, which was included in the aforementioned interval. The radiance of his body was like that of a young paddy plant, and he was adorned with all auspicious marks. **94** He was nine cubits tall, prosperous, and born in the Ugra lineage. **95** When he reached the age of sixteen, he was in the prime of youth. **96** One day, he went out of the city with his army for recreation. **97** In the forest near the hermitage, his mother's father, King Mahipala of Mahipalapura, was performing austerities, grieving over the loss of his queen. **98** He was performing austerities in the midst of the five fires. **99** Seeing him, the prince stood near him without paying him any respect. **100** Without thinking, the angry sage, who was a noble and a seasoned ascetic, thought to himself, "I am a noble, born in a high lineage, and a seasoned ascetic, and I am the father of his mother. Yet, this ignorant prince, intoxicated with pride, stands before me without paying his respects." **101** Filled with anger, he was about to throw the axe he was holding to cut firewood into the dying fire, when the omniscient Lord Parshvanatha, raising his voice, said, "Do not cut it, there is a living being in it." **102** Even though he was warned, the prince, intent on killing, cut the wood. **103** This act resulted in the serpent and serpentess living inside the wood being cut into two pieces. Seeing this, the noble prince...

Page #464:
---------------------------
436
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, the Naga and Nagini were split into two parts due to the severance. Seeing this, the son of Subhauma approached them.  || 103 || 

"You are a guru, a tapasvi, and you are carrying a heavy ego, but you don't know if this wrong tapasya leads to papa asrava or not. This ignorant tapasya is causing you suffering in this world and in the next."  || 104 ||

Hearing these words, the muni replied, "I am the Lord, what can you do to me? You are speaking like this without knowing the greatness of my tapasya. Why are you doing this?" || 105 ||

"Sitting in the middle of five fires, living on air, standing on one leg with arms raised for a long time, and breaking your fast with fallen leaves, etc. This tapasya that burns the body is very difficult. There is no tapasya greater than this." || 106-107 ||

Hearing these words, Subhauma smiled and said, "I do not consider you a guru, nor do I disrespect you. But those who abandon the Agamas and the Aapta, and are under the influence of the four kshayas of mithyatva, krodha, etc., and engage in violence against the six types of beings with the body, speech, mind, and through action, causing others to act, and approving of such actions, and taking refuge in the words of the un-enlightened, and seeking nirvana - their desire is like trying to get rice by pounding the husk, or like trying to get ghee by churning water, or like trying to get gold by burning a pile of stones, or like a blind man running into a fire out of fear of the fire. The suffering of a person without knowledge is the cause of future suffering. I am saying this because I have great affection for you." || 108-114 ||

Hearing these words, the tapasvi, with his contrary mind, understood them, but due to the influence of past animosity, or due to his attachment to his own side, or due to coming from a world of suffering, or due to his inherently evil nature, he did not accept them. Instead, he thought, "This young man is arrogant and is disrespecting me." He became very angry at Lord Parshvanath. With this anger, he died and became a celestial being named Shambara. This is because the path of those who are angry is like this.  || 115-117 ||

Meanwhile, the Naga and Nagini, having attained peace through the teachings of the Kumar, were no longer angry. || 118 ||

Page #465:
---------------------------
The Thirty-seventh Chapter

The great king Arihandra and his wife, Prithusri, were blessed with a son. After thirty years of his childhood, the king of Saketa, Jayasena, sent his messenger to the great sage Parsvanatha, with a gift of horses and other treasures from the Bhagali region. Parsvanatha received the gifts with joy and honored the messenger, asking him about the prosperity of Saketa. The messenger, in response, first described the great sage Rishabhadeva and then spoke of the city of Saketa. This was appropriate, as wise people understand the order of things. Hearing this, Parsvanatha pondered the meaning of his own Tirthankara karma and its benefits. He thought, "Blessed is Rishabhadeva, who attained liberation." As he reflected, he realized the continuity of his past lives, seeing all his previous existences. 

The brilliance of his knowledge and the diminishing of his mental obscurations led him to attain self-knowledge. The celestial beings came and honored him. At that moment, Indra and other gods arrived to celebrate the auspicious occasion of his initiation, with grand festivities including the abhisheka (ceremony).

Then, Parsvanatha, with words that were true and reasonable, bid farewell to his relatives and mounted a palanquin called Vimala. He arrived at the Ashvavana (horse forest) and, with great fortitude, sat on a large stone platform facing north, in the posture of a sage. Thus, on the eleventh day of the dark fortnight of the month of Pausha, in the early morning, he bowed to the Siddhas (liberated souls) and, in the presence of three hundred kings, accepted the fortune of initiation. This initiation was like a noble messenger, a daughter of liberation, who brought the fulfillment of all desires.

Indra worshipped the hair that Parsvanatha had plucked out with five fists and, with great respect, carried it to the ocean of milk.

Parsvanatha, who had attained Samayika (a vow of self-restraint) and the fourth knowledge (knowledge of the mind), went to the city of Gulmakheta to partake in his parana (breaking of the fast).

There, the king named Dhanya, with a dark complexion, welcomed him with eight auspicious substances and offered him pure food, fulfilling the requirements of the parana.

Page #466:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana
The Tirthankara spent four months in the state of Channastya, attaining purity. He then went to the forest where he had received his initiation and sat beneath a large Deodar tree.  He was becoming increasingly pure by following the rules of Tela, his liberation was near, and his power was growing. He practiced yoga for seven days, deepening his meditation on Dharma. At that time, a demon named Shambara, a creature of the Kamatha, was flying through the sky in his aerial chariot. Suddenly, his chariot stopped. Using his knowledge of Vibhangavadhi, he saw clearly the karmic bonds of his past lives. Enraged, he roared loudly and began to pour down a torrential rain.  Like Yama, the god of death, this wicked being continued to unleash various calamities for seven days, even bringing small mountains to throw at the Tirthankara. 
Knowing the cause of these attacks through his knowledge of Avadhi, the king of the earth emerged from the ground with his wife. He was adorned with a canopy of serpents, their bodies sparkling with jewels. The king of the earth stood before the Tirthankara, shielding him with the serpents, while his wife held a vajra-shaped umbrella high above the Tirthankara. The Acharya says, "It is natural for cruel snakes to remember the kindness shown to them, just as compassionate people never forget the kindness they have received."
Then, due to the power of the Tirthankara's meditation, the demon's karmic obscurations were destroyed, and all the calamities he had unleashed vanished. 
The Tirthankara, through his second Shukla meditation, conquered the remaining three types of karmic bondage. On the thirteenth day of the dark fortnight of Chaitra, at dawn, under the constellation Visakha, he attained Kevala Jnana, the all-knowing state, illuminating all worlds. This was a great event. 
At that time, Indra worshipped the Tirthankara's Kevala Jnana. Shambara, the astrologer, also attained liberation at that time and became peaceful. He attained pure Samyak Darshan. Seeing this, the seven hundred ascetics living in the forest abandoned their false beliefs and took up the vows of restraint. They all became pure Samyak Drishtis and, with great reverence, circumambulated the Tirthankara, bowing at his feet.

Page #467:
---------------------------
The Thirty-Seventh Chapter

436. What is the use of such enmity, what peace is there for the wicked? Friendship and even enmity are for the benefit of the great souls. || 14 ||

There were ten Ganadharas, beginning with Swayambhu, in the Samavasarana of Lord Parsvanatha. There were three hundred and fifty Muni-Rajas, the knowers of the past. There were ten thousand nine hundred teachers, one thousand four hundred Ayadh-Jnanis, one thousand Keval-Jnanis, and the same number of holders of Vikriya-Riddhi. There were seven hundred and fifty Manah-Paryaya-Jnanis, and six hundred Vadis. Thus, in all, there were sixteen thousand Muni-Rajas, who were soon to attain liberation, in his Samavasarana. || 149-152 ||

There were thirty-six thousand Aryikas, beginning with Sulochana, one lakh Shravakas, three lakh Shravikas, countless gods and goddesses, and a countable number of Tiryanchas. Thus, with twelve assemblies, the Lord preached the Dharma for five months less than seventy years. Finally, when one month of his life remained, he stopped his travels and, with thirty-six Munis, took on the form of a statue on the peak of Sammed Shikhar. On the seventh day of the bright fortnight of Shravan, in the morning, in the Visakha constellation, he took refuge in the third and fourth aspects of Shukla-Dhyana, and then, in sequence, he remained in the thirteenth and fourteenth Gunasthanas. Then, in sequence, he performed the actions appropriate for that time, and, with the destruction of all karmas, he remained unshakeable in liberation. At that time, Indra came and celebrated his Nirvana-Kalyanak and paid homage to him. Acharya Gunabhadra says that, because we are enriched by his pure qualities, we also pay homage to Lord Parsvanatha. || 153-159 ||

Those who are deep in the beginning, middle, and end, like the ocean. If there can be any example of such noble souls, then Lord Parsvanatha, worthy of being counted among the forgiving, can be considered. || 160 ||

"O Lord! At the time of your birth-ceremony, on Mount Sumeru, by your exhalations and inhalations, you caused the winds to move and play, and you greatly delighted the Indras. What could such a celestial being, who has attained such a high position through your forbearance, do? He is like the ocean, full of knowledge. May the Jina, the son of Prithu, protect us!" || 161 ||

They began to pay homage at the feet of Parsvanatha. The Acharya says, "Where is there liberation from enmity for the wicked, the low-born? It is truly said that even enmity, let alone friendship, is a cause of growth for great souls." || 145-148 ||

Page #468:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**440**

**162.**  Your knowledge, having attained the utmost purity, is like the ocean, but how can the ocean be compared to it? For the ocean becomes agitated by the great wind and its water turns blue. Thus, the ocean cannot reach your knowledge from afar. Similarly, your meditation is also unshakeable and has attained the utmost purity. It cannot be compared to the ocean either. O Lord! You are as immovable as Mount Meru. Then, how can you be disturbed by this insignificant being, like the wind of inhalation and exhalation? Thus, may Lord Parshvanath, the master of many praises, protect us.

**163.** O Lord! Although all Tirthankaras are equal in possessing great qualities like patience, etc., your qualities, which are known throughout the world and please everyone, are famous because of a single insignificant being. This is right, because the fame of great men due to the actions of their enemies is never achieved through the actions of their friends.

**164.** O Lord! You have removed the actions of Shambhardeva with a peaceful mind. You were not troubled by him, nor did you feel anger or fear. Therefore, wise people do not praise you, but your greatness and peace are astonishing. Therefore, you should be praised. Thus, may Lord Parshvanath, who is praised by all, destroy our worldly existence.

**165.** Look, both Dharanendra and Padmavati are very grateful and righteous. They have attained praise in the world. But it should be understood that your grace is the only ground for the welfare of the three worlds. If it is not considered so, and it is assumed that both of them have stopped throwing mountains, etc., then it must also be investigated who destroyed the previous disturbances? Thus, may Lord Parshvanath, who is praised with essential praise, protect us.

O Lord! The mountain...

Page #469:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

**The pavilion of the serpent-hood, adorned by Padmavati's canopy, the destruction of harmful karma, the attainment of Kevala Jnana, the attainment of a glorious body devoid of the five elements, the destruction of the cycle of birth and death, the fear of Sambhardeva, the emergence of your Tirthankara name-karma, and the destruction of all obstacles - all these manifested together. May Lord Parshvanath, the crown jewel of the fierce lineage, forever destroy the fear of Yama - may he protect us from birth and death!** ||156||

**"Is this peace due to the Lord's meditation? Or due to Dharanendra? Or due to Padmavati? Or due to the Lord's forgiveness? Or due to Indra? Or due to its own nature? Or due to the expansion of the mantra? Or due to the fear of the enemy? Or due to the Lord's auspicious rise? Or due to the passage of time? Or due to the destruction of harmful karma?" Thus, the gods, holding offerings in their hands, fearing the obstacles created by Sambhardeva, may Lord Parshvanath, the foremost among the valiant, destroy our sins!** ||167||

**Hearing his words, which were sweet to the ears, pleasing to the heart, beneficial, and based on reason, Sambhardeva abandoned his intense Mithyatva, like poison, due to his long-standing animosity. He himself came and praised him. Even though he was cruel, he attained salvation. May Lord Parshvanath, who is seated on the throne of Indra, having attained the state of Siddha, destroy our group of obstacles!** ||168||

**Parshvanath's soul was first the minister Marubhuti, then he became a deva in the Sahasrar heaven, from there he became a Vidyadhara, then he became a deva in the Achyuta heaven, from there he became the Chakravarti Vananami, then he became Ahminndra in the Madhyama Aveyaka, from there he became the king Anand, adorned with the qualities of kings, then he became Indra in the Ananta heaven, and finally he became the destroyer of harmful karma. ** ||169||

Page #470:
---------------------------
442
Mahapuraana, Uttarapuraana
Aarya
Kamatha, Kukkuta, Sarpa, Panchamabhuja, Ahi, then Naraka. Raisai, Simha, Naraki, Narpa, then Shambara, Divja. || 170 ||
Ityaarṣe Bhagavadguṇabhadraācāryapraṇīte Triṣaṣṭilakṣaṇamahāpuraaṇasangrahe Pārśvatīrthaṅkarapuraaṇam nāma Trisaptatittamaṁ parva || 73 ||

-:08:
The Lord Parshvanatha, who destroys the group of karmas. || 166 || The Kamatha jiva was first a Kamatha, then a Kukkuta, then a Sarpa, then went to the fifth Naraka, then became an Ahi, then went to Naraka, then became a Bhil and went to Naraka, then became a Simha and went to Naraka, and then became a king named Mahipala and became Shambara Deva. || 170 || Thus, the seventy-third parva, which describes the Purana of Parshvanatha Tirthankara, is completed in the Trishatilakṣaṇamahāpuraaṇasangraha, composed by the renowned Bhagavadguṇabhadraācārya. || 73 ||
1**:1

Page #471:
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixty-Seven

The glorious Vardhamana Jinendra, bearing the name Anantarasārthaka, may grant me the increase obtained by the destruction of the destructive karmas. ||1||

Having attained the knowledge of the true meaning of the scriptures, you have become worthy of respect, and by the arrival of the gods, you have become free from blemishes. ||2||

Your name is Vira Sena, you are called Mahāvīra by Rudra, and you are the leader of the army of the victorious monks. The Ganadharadeva worship your lotus feet, and many monks meditate on you. ||3||

O God! Your knowledge, which is the light of the world and the non-world, is considered the main thing. Is there anything in this world that your omniscience cannot see? ||4||

O Lord! Your form itself indicates the absence of your anger and other negative emotions. Who can say that there is a blemish in a precious gem? (Meaning: Just as the purity of gems is self-evident, so is your peaceful nature.) ||5||

O Lord! Your pilgrimage continues even after crossing many other false pilgrimages. Therefore, after praising you, your Purāṇa is narrated. ||6||

This Mahāpurāṇa is like a vast ocean. We, who wish to cross it, should follow the path of Śrī Jinaseṇa Swami. ||7||

This ocean of Purāṇa is deep and boundless, and my intellect is small and has a shore. Still, I want to cross this ocean of Purāṇa with this intellect. ||8||

Although my intellect is small and this Purāṇa is very large, just as we cross the ocean in a small boat, I will also cross it with this small intellect. ||9||

First, the story and the storyteller are described, because if both are free from defects, then there will be no defect in the Purāṇa. ||10||

The story is called that which, when heard, leads to the determination of what is to be avoided and what is to be adopted. What is the use of other stories that are bitter to the ears of those who seek benefit? ||11||

The storyteller is called one who is free from the defects of attachment, etc., and who, through his divine words, benefits everyone impartially. ||12||

This verse is longer in the book. May Vardhamana, the giver of auspiciousness, be praised. He is praised by many kinds of assemblies. ||13||

The description is obtained. ||13||

Page #472:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, these two are found in this Purana, spoken by the Jinas. They are not found in other false Puranas, therefore, this Purana is worthy of being accepted by the learned. || 13 ||

Now, in the middle of the islands, in the Jambudvipa, in the eastern Videha region, on the northern bank of the Sita river, there is a country called Pushkalavati. In that country, there is a city called Pundarikin, and in that city, there is a forest called Madhu. In that forest, there lived a king of the hunters named Pururava. He had a beloved wife named Kalika, who was devoted to him. This is appropriate, because the Creator brings together beings who are suited to each other. || 14-16 ||

One day, due to confusion about directions, a sage named Sagaraseena was wandering in that forest. Seeing him, Pururava the hunter, mistaking him for a deer, was about to kill him, but his wife stopped him, saying, "These are forest deities wandering, don't kill them." || 17-18 ||

At that time, Pururava the hunter, with a calm mind, approached the sage, bowed down to him, listened to his words, and became peaceful with faith. || 19 ||

Just as a thirsty person in the summer heat finds peace upon finding a pond filled with cool water, or just as a being frightened by the causes of worldly suffering finds peace upon finding the teachings of the Jina, or just as a student studying the scriptures finds peace upon finding a great and renowned gurukul, so too did that hunter find peace upon finding the sage Sagaraseena. He received the vow of renunciation of honey, etc., from the sage, and he observed it with great respect throughout his life. Upon the completion of his lifespan, he became a god in the Saudharma heaven, possessing a divine lifespan like that of the ocean. || 20-22 ||

In this Jambudvipa, in the Bharat-kshetra, in the middle of the Aryakshetra, there is a famous country called Kosala, which always enjoys a good state. || 23 ||

In that country, there was never any harm, so there was no need for protection. But that lack of protection was not due to the absence of protectors. Similarly, there were no givers there, the lack of givers was not due to stinginess, but because there were no takers due to contentment. || 24 ||

There, hardness was only in the breasts of women, the hearts of those living there were not hardened. Similarly, the words "Give me something" did not come out of a request, and the words "Protect us" did not come out of fear. || 25 ||

Similarly, the moon is the only one who is not diminished by blemishes. Stability is only in those who practice austerities, not in those who are attached to worldly things. || 26 ||

One should help living beings. || 12 ||

Page #473:
---------------------------
## Chapter 47

**26.** Pain, i.e. being crushed, was only in sesame, flax, and sugarcane, not in any other beings. Beheading was only in grown rice plants, not in any other. Bondage and liberation were discussed only in the Agamas, not in any criminals. Restraint of the senses was only in the dispassionate, not in any other people. Dullness was only in water, not in any other beings. Sharpness was only in needles, etc., not in any other beings. Crookedness was only in the handles, not in any other work.

**27.** The cowherds were not foolish, the women and children were not cowardly, the dwarfs were not deceitful, and the Chandals were not wicked. There was no land that was not adorned with sugarcane, no mountain that did not have sandalwood, no lake that did not have lotuses, and no forest that did not have sweet fruits.

**28.** In the middle of that country was a city called Vinita (Ayodhya), which was like a virtuous woman, providing the people with the best happiness.

**29.** That city was first built by Indra to show off his skill in city building, or to show his devotion to the Tirthankaras.

**30.** Just as the intellect of a monk is adorned by humility, the army is adorned by its leader, and the waist is adorned by a gem-studded belt, so that city was adorned by the rampart built in the middle.

**31.** The rampart of that city, surrounded by a moat, was only for its beauty, because its builder was Indra and its lord was the Chakravarti, so what could it fear?

**32.** There, the worship of the Jinas took place in every house every day, because all the auspicious ceremonies of the householders were performed with the worship of the Jinas.

**33.** There, childhood was not spent without learning, youth was not spent without enjoyment, old age was not spent without dharma, and death was not without samadhi.

**34.** There, no one's knowledge was without action, no action was without fruit, no fruit was without enjoyment, and no enjoyment was without both wealth and dharma.

**35.** If there was a separation of the ministers and other chief officials from the people living there, it was only due to their position of authority, not due to ornaments, etc.

**36.** The two words "kshinata" and "do" were found only in the speech of the moon-like king, not in any other king. The practice of remaining without food was only in the ascetics, not in any other.

Page #474:
---------------------------
446
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the gods gathered there, coming from heaven, along with the best of men. They were constantly delighted with the friendship born in heaven. ||40|| Which of these are gods and which are men? All are alike in form and so on. Thus, the lords of the birds, the Vidyadharas, were bewildered in their discernment. ||41|| Seeing the women of the marketplace, the young gods were amazed, but they did not engage with them, due to their different caste. ||42|| The objects of desire for the senses were there, but they were not in heaven, for the birth of the one worthy of worship by the gods took place there. ||43|| The gods, with their skill, had built houses there to conquer the artificial flying machines. What more can be said about them? ||44|| Just as Indra is the lord of the line of heaven, so Bharat was the lord of that city, who was the increaser of the Ikshvaku dynasty and the son of Lord Rishabhadeva. ||45|| Akampana and other kings, Nami and other Vidyadharas, and Magadha and other gods, with their pride abandoned and eager, bowed their heads, considering his command as the most precious ornament, like a garland of Malati flowers. ||46-47|| With the feelings born of good deeds, and with the destruction of karma, and with the special quality of the feeling of being worthy, he attained the ultimate limit of the best of men, that is, he was considered the most excellent. ||48|| That Bharat was the eldest son of Lord Adinath, the sixteenth Manu, the first Chakravarti, and he was liberated in a single moment (became a knower). Therefore, with whom could he be compared? That is, with no one, he was completely unique. ||49|| His goddess, Anantamati, was adorned as if she were the glory of a body-bearer, or as if Lakshmi herself had come, leaving her lotus-like abode. ||50|| Just as special Lakshmi is born from intelligence and prowess, so from them both, the Pururava Bhil's living god, the eldest son named Marichi, was born. ||51|| At the time of the initiation of his grandfather, Lord Rishabhadeva, Marichi, inspired by devotion to his guru, renounced all possessions along with the kings like Kachcha and took initiation. He endured the hardships of penance for a long time, and the pain of hunger, cold,

Page #475:
---------------------------
The 57th Chapter

He himself began to take fruits, coverings, etc. The order of the gods and women who were the holders of the non-Jain faith was not followed. || 54 || They said, "Take another form, as you wish." Hearing these words, he was also strongly influenced by false belief. || 55 || He took the first initiation of the wandering ascetics. This act of the long-lived, fast-moving ones is a guide to the wrong path. || 56 || The knowledge of that scripture arose in him by itself. For both the virtuous and the wicked, knowledge of their own subject arises by itself. || 57 || Even after hearing the words of the Tirthankara, he did not accept the true Dharma. He thought to himself, "Just as Lord Rishabhadeva renounced all possessions and attained the power to shake the three worlds, so too will I establish the other doctrine that I have propagated in the world, and by the great influence that will result from it, I will obtain the expectation of Indra - I will obtain the worship performed by Indra. I desire that all this will surely happen." || 58-60 || Thus, due to the rise of pride, the sinner did not turn away from his false belief, and even though he was tainted by many faults, he continued to wear the saffron robe. || 61 || Although he held three staffs, he was devoid of the proper staff, i.e., the proper staff of restraint of the senses. Just as a wicked king receives many kinds of punishments, so too was he destined to receive many punishments in the earth realms like Ratnaprabha, etc. || 62 || He was devoid of right knowledge, and therefore, even though he had a water pot, he did not purify himself after defecation, saying, "Does water purify the soul?" || 63 || Although he bathed in cold water in the morning and ate roots and fruits, he still proclaimed his own fame by renouncing possessions, declaring to people, "I am a renunciant." || 64 || Just as the sun, moon, and ocean brought by a magician are unreal - mere illusions - so too were the principles he saw unreal - illusory principles. || 65 || Thus, teaching his own fabricated principles, Marichi, the son of King Bharata, wandered on this earth for a long time. || 66 || At the end of his life, he died and went to the Brahma heaven, where he ate ambrosia and experienced happiness for a period of ten oceans. || 67 ||

Page #476:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana:

68. After returning to Saketa, the son of Kali, a learned Brahmin named Jatil, was born to Kapil.
69. He followed the path of a Parivrajaka, illuminating that path. After a long time, he died and became a god in Saudharma.
70. After enjoying the appropriate pleasures there for a period of time equivalent to two oceans, he was born in this Bharat, in the excellent city of Sthunanagara.
71. He was born as the son of the sage Bharadvaja, to his wife Pushpadatta, and was named Pushyamitra.
72. He adopted the previous attire, as defined by nature and others, and enlightened the minds of twenty-five foolish people with the right knowledge.
73. Due to his subdued passions, he became a god with a lifespan of a deva, enjoying the pleasures of Saudharma for a period equivalent to one ocean.
74. After enjoying those pleasures, he was born in the village of Sutika in Bharat, as the son of the sage Agnibhu, to his wife Gautami, and was named Abhisah.
75. He took initiation as a Parivrajaka and spent his time as before. At the end of his life, he attained the divine state in the Sanatkumara Kalpa.
76. He enjoyed the pleasures of heaven for a period equivalent to seven oceans. At the end of his lifespan, he was born in this Bharat, in the city of Mandira.
77. He was born as the son of the sage Gautama, to his wife Kaushiki, and was named Agnimitra. After attaining the ultimate knowledge, he returned to his previous life.
78. He took initiation as a Maheindra and was born again in the city of Mandira, as the son of the sage Salankayana.
79. He was known throughout the world as Bharadvaja, and practiced the three-staffed, unbroken initiation.
80. He became a god in the Maheindra Kalpa, with a lifespan equivalent to seven oceans. After being born again, he revealed the wrong path.
81. Due to the fruits of his actions, he was born in all the lower realms, experiencing great suffering. He wandered through countless births in the Trasa and Sthavara realms.
82. After being exhausted from his wanderings, he was born in the city of Rajagriha in the Magadha country, as the son of a learned Brahmin named Sandilya.
83. He was born to his wife Parashari, and was named Sthavara. He was a master of the Vedas and Vedangas, but was also a vessel of sin.
84. His intellect, knowledge, austerity, peace, meditation, and understanding of the truth were all useless, like the rays of the sun without the sun itself.

Page #477:
---------------------------
## Chapter 67:

The one who had lost his patience, [Vishwabhuti], still clung to the ascetic initiation. After death, he became a god in the Maheindra heaven, living for the duration of seven oceans. || 85 ||

From there, he descended to this land, in the excellent city of Rajagriha in Magadha. He was born as the son of King Vishwabhuti, from a Jain woman. || 86 ||

His son, Vishwanandi, was known for his valor. He was the younger brother of King Vishwabhuti, a man of great fortune. || 87 ||

Vishwabhuti had a younger brother named Vishakhabhuti, who was very prosperous. His wife, Lakshmana, gave birth to a foolish son named Vishakhananda. All of them lived happily. || 88 ||

One day, seeing the destruction of the autumn clouds, the pure-minded King Vishwabhuti became detached. This great man gave his kingdom to his younger brother and made his son the heir apparent. || 1 ||

Then, he took the Digambara initiation from the guru named Shridhara, along with three hundred kings who had adopted the Sattvic way of life. He performed both external and internal austerities with equanimity for a long time. || 10-11 ||

One day, the prince Vishwanandi was playing with his wives in his beautiful garden called Manohara. Seeing him, Vishakhananda desired to possess that beautiful garden. He went to his father and said, "Give me the Manohara garden, otherwise I will leave the country. I will leave your kingdom and go elsewhere." || 12-14 ||

The Acharya says, "Even while enjoying the best pleasures, one who loves contrary objects will only bear the burden of future suffering." || 95 ||

Hearing his son's words, the father, filled with paternal affection, said, "How much is that garden? I will give it to you now." Thus, he appeased his son. He called Vishwanandi and said, "Now you take the burden of the kingdom. I will attack the nearby hostile kings, quell their anger, and return in a few days." || 96-17 ||

Hearing his father's words, the excellent son Vishwanandi replied, "O revered father, you stay here without worry. I will go and make those kings subservient." || 18-19 ||

Page #478:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, states that the king, out of affection for his brother, gave him the kingdom. But the brother, driven by greed for the forest, was ready to cheat his own son. Such a wicked intention is despicable. ||1.1||

Then, with the king's permission, and with his own strength, the valiant Vishwanandi, ready to conquer his enemies, set out on his campaign. ||1.10||

But the foolish Vishakhabhuti, disregarding the order, gave the forest to Vishakhanandi, who desired it unjustly, out of affection for him. ||1.11-1.12||

Vishwanandi, hearing this, was immediately consumed by anger. He said, "Look, my uncle has deceived me and sent me to fight against the enemy kings, while giving my forest to his own son. Does he think that by saying 'give' I will give it? What is a forest, after all? This wicked act is tarnishing my virtue." Thinking this, he returned and was ready to kill the one who had robbed him of his wealth. ||1.13-1.14||

Fearing this, Vishakhanandi climbed a kapittha tree and hid himself. The young Vishwanandi uprooted the kapittha tree and was about to kill him with it. Seeing this, Vishakhanandi fled and hid behind a stone pillar. But the strong Vishwanandi quickly broke the stone pillar with his palms. Vishakhanandi fled from there too. ||1.105-1.107||

Although he had wronged the young prince, seeing him fleeing like this, the young prince was moved by both affection and compassion. Moved by this, he said to him, "Don't be afraid." Not only that, he called him back and gave him the forest. He himself, contemplating the sorrowful state of the world, took initiation from the guru named Sambhuta. This is right, because even the wrong done by the lowly becomes a good deed for the virtuous. ||1.108-1.110||

At that time, Vishakhabhuti also felt great remorse. "I have committed a great sin," he thought. He then took sannyasa as atonement. ||1.111||

Meanwhile, Vishwanandi, wandering through all the lands, began to perform severe austerities. His body became extremely emaciated. Gradually, he reached the city of Mathura and entered it to eat. At that time, his own strength was lost and his feet were unsteady. Due to the company of vices, the king of the eight kingdoms... ||1.112-1.113||

...came to Mathura city, invited by someone. Vishakhanandi took shelter in the palace of a prostitute. ||1.114||

Page #479:
---------------------------
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter

35. Seeing him slip, the Muni, filled with anger, said, "Where is your prowess, which was seen when you broke the stone pillar?" 115.  He, being a fool, made a mockery of him, saying, "Where has it gone?" 116.  The Muni, holding his words in his heart, became angry and said to himself, "You will surely reap the fruits of your mockery." 117.  In the end, he attained liberation along with his followers and became a Deva in the Mahaśukra heaven, and the soul of Viśākhabhūti also became a Deva there. 118.  Their lifespan there was sixteen oceans long. After enjoying the pleasures there for a long time, both of them fell from there.  Of these two, the soul of Viśākhabhūti, in the beautiful country of Podanapura, was born as the son of King Prajāpati and Queen Jayavati, named Vijay.  After him, the soul of Viśvanandi was born as the son of the same King Prajāpati and another queen, Mṛgāvati, named Tripṛṣṭha.  He was a promising half-chakravarti. 119-122.  As soon as he was born, his prowess, which destroyed all his enemies, spread throughout the world like the sun's rays. 123.  Lakshmi, who could not stay anywhere else and was countless years old, was waiting for this Tripṛṣṭha with great eagerness. 124.  His chakra-ratna, which was achieved by his prowess, was like a symbol of Lakshmi, and the entire earth, from Magadha to the sea, was under his control. 125.  "This Tripṛṣṭha is a brave warrior like a lion."  Those who praised him in this way were, in my opinion, foolish, because Tripṛṣṭha, who had humbled even the heads of the Devas, was not like a lion, a fool. 126.  His fame, like the moon's light, which was limited to a certain area and had both increase and decrease, spread throughout the world and remained for a long time, like the lineage of Brahma. 127.  In the northern part of the Vijaya mountain, in the city of Alakāpura, lived a king of the Vidyadharas named Mayūragrīva.  His queen's name was Nīlāñjanā.  The soul of Viśākhaṇanda, after wandering in the world for a long time and suffering greatly, was born as his son, named Aśvanīvābha, who was a wicked person. 129. 
At that time, Viśākhaṇanda, whose kingdom had been destroyed due to bad company, had come to Mathura as an ambassador of some king.  He was sitting under the awning of a prostitute's house.  By chance, a cow in that house became angry and pushed Viśvanandi Muni, causing him to fall.  Seeing him fall, Viśākhaṇanda, filled with anger, said, "Where is your prowess, which was seen when you broke the stone pillar?"  In this way, he mocked the Muni with his wicked words. 112-116.  The Muni, holding his words in his heart, became angry and said to himself, "You will surely reap the fruits of your mockery." 117.  In the end, he attained liberation along with his followers and became a Deva in the Mahaśukra heaven, and the soul of Viśākhabhūti also became a Deva there. 118.  Their lifespan there was sixteen oceans long. After enjoying the pleasures there for a long time, both of them fell from there.  Of these two, the soul of Viśākhabhūti, in the beautiful country of Podanapura, was born as the son of King Prajāpati and Queen Jayavati, named Vijay.  After him, the soul of Viśvanandi was born as the son of the same King Prajāpati and another queen, Mṛgāvati, named Tripṛṣṭha.  He was a promising half-chakravarti. 119-122.  As soon as he was born, his prowess, which destroyed all his enemies, spread throughout the world like the sun's rays. 123.  Lakshmi, who could not stay anywhere else and was countless years old, was waiting for this Tripṛṣṭha with great eagerness. 124.  His chakra-ratna, which was achieved by his prowess, was like a symbol of Lakshmi, and the entire earth, from Magadha to the sea, was under his control. 125.  "This Tripṛṣṭha is a brave warrior like a lion."  Those who praised him in this way were, in my opinion, foolish, because Tripṛṣṭha, who had humbled even the heads of the Devas, was not like a lion, a fool. 126.  His fame, like the moon's light, which was limited to a certain area and had both increase and decrease, spread throughout the world and remained for a long time, like the lineage of Brahma. 127.  In the northern part of the Vijaya mountain, in the city of Alakāpura, lived a king of the Vidyadharas named Mayūragrīva.  His queen's name was Nīlāñjanā.  The soul of Viśākhaṇanda, after wandering in the world for a long time and suffering greatly, was born as his son, named Aśvanīvābha, who was a wicked person. 129.

Page #480:
---------------------------
452
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraana
All of them, due to the special merit of their past deeds, were enjoying their desired objects and pleasures, and were living happily. || 13 ||
From here, the southern range of the mountain of victory was adorned by the city of Ratha-nupura-chakravala. || 131 ||
Jvalanajati, who was like Indra, protected it. He was adorned with the three kinds of knowledge, acquired through family tradition and received from others. || 132 ||
He had subdued all the Vidhyadhara kings of the southern range by his prowess, so their humble crowns adorned his lotus feet. || 133 ||
His queen was named Vayu-vega, who was the daughter of the Vidhyadhara king of Tilaka-pura and the queen Subhadra. || 134 ||
Their son was named Arka-kirti, who had conquered the sun by his prowess, and their daughter was named Swayam-prabha, who was as radiant as a great gem. || 135 ||
All the auspicious marks of a woman were present in her body, from head to foot, and they were pervading her body, attaining the status of examples. || 136 ||
Having attained youth, she was an ornament even to ornaments. She had made the creator of women fulfilled by her own self, in two ways. || 137 ||
Seeing her, who was perfectly beautiful and who attracted love, her father Jvalanajati thought, "To whom should I give her? Who is worthy of her?" || 138 ||
At that time, he called the purohita Sambhinna-srota and asked him about this matter. The purohita, who was very skilled in the science of omens, said, "This Swayam-prabha will be the Mahadevi of Keshava, the first one, and you will also attain the position of the emperor of the Vidhyadharas through her." || 139-140 ||
Accepting his words, which were worthy of belief, he sent his minister Indra, who was pure, knowledgeable about the scriptures, and devoted to the king, with a letter and gifts to Podana-pura. He went quickly and reached Podana-pura. At that time, the king of Podana-pura, Pushpa-karandaka, was residing in the forest. The minister saw him, paid his respects, gave him the letter, presented the gifts, and sat down in his proper place. || 141-143 ||
The king, Prajapati, seeing the seal, opened the letter and read the contents, which were written by the one who was appointed to the affairs of peace and war. || 144 ||

Page #481:
---------------------------
The 74th chapter of the book, the glorious lord of the birds, the jewel of the Jain world, the king who delights his people, the king of the city of Rathnapur, the famous Jwalanajati, the sun of the Namic dynasty, respectfully greets the great king Prajapati, the lord of the city of Podanpur, born from the lineage of the mighty Bahubali, who arose from the Adibharata, with a bow of respect and a question of well-being. He humbly requests, "Our marriage alliance is not new, as it has been established through our lineage for generations. There is no need to examine the virtues and flaws of our lineages today, as both our lineages are pure and renowned, like the sun and moon. My daughter, Swayamprabha, who is like Lakshmi born in three parts, may she be the wife of your nephew, Triprutha, and may she, through her own qualities, bring great joy to him."

Prajapati Maharaj, upon hearing his brother's words, pleased his minister by saying, "What is pleasing to Jwalanajati is pleasing to me." He then bid farewell to the minister with great respect and honor. The minister, upon reaching his lord, immediately informed him of all the news.

Jwalanajati, along with his companion Sarkakirti, quickly brought Swayamprabha and presented her to Triprutha with great pomp and ceremony, thus performing the marriage.

Along with this, Jwalanajati, according to the prescribed method, also bestowed upon Triprutha two Vidya (knowledge) named Singhvahinī and Garuda vahinī, who are known for their power and are Siddhas (perfected beings).

Meanwhile, Ashvagriva, upon hearing this news through his spies, was consumed by the fire of anger. With the desire to wage war, he arrived at the mountain of Rathavarta, surrounded by Vidya-dharas, masters of the three Vidya, skilled in the art of warfare, and numerous warriors equipped with various weapons, ready to confront the enemy.

Upon hearing of Ashvagriva's advance, Triprutha, who was extremely harsh towards his enemies, also arrived there with his four-fold army, ready for battle.

The two, ready for war, extremely arrogant, covered the sun with their arrows, along with their fellow archers, and with their horses, chariots, elephants, and infantry, engaged in battle, forming their armies according to the prescribed formations.

Page #482:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the elephant, like a thunderbolt, was very strong, like a garland of pearls. Darkness was defeated by the sun, just as the three-backed one defeated the horse-headed one. ||11|| That horse-headed one, though defeated in the battle of illusion, still sent his cruel discus towards the three-backed one. ||162|| The three-backed one, after circling it, caught it with his right arm. He then held it and aimed it at his enemy. ||163|| He cut the horse-headed one's neck in two. As the lord of the three parts, the three-backed one became the half-wheel-bearer. ||164|| With the victory he gained, and with the victory of his brother, the wheel-bearer, the three-backed one went to the mountain of Vijayardha and made the king of the city of Rathnapur, Jwalanajati, the lord of the two rows. This is right, for the fruit of the lord's anger and grace is manifested here. ||165-166|| The three-backed one enjoyed the wealth of the kingdom for a long time, but he was not satisfied and continued to desire enjoyment. As a result, he died and went to the seventh hell, being a great beginner and a great accumulator. ||167|| There, he suffered for a long time the pain he had inflicted on others, as well as the pain related to the earth. Finally, he escaped from that difficult hell and, due to his intense sin, became a lion on the mountain of Singhagir, near the bank of the river Ganga, in the Bharat Kshetra of this Jambudvipa. There too, he committed intense sin, and therefore he went to the earth called Ratnapraba, where fire burns. There, he suffered terrible pain until he reached the ocean. Then, he was expelled from there and became a lion with shining hair on the peak of the Himalayas, in the eastern direction of Sindhukuta, in this Jambudvipa. ||168-171|| That lion, whose face was terrifying with sharp teeth, was once seen eating a deer he had caught. At that time, the Charana Muni, Ajitanjaya, with the Muni Raja, Amitaguna, was passing through the sky. They saw the lion and, remembering the words of the Tirthankara, out of compassion, they descended from the sky and reached the lion. They sat on the rock and loudly spoke words of Dharma. They said, "O noble king of the deer! In your previous birth as the three-backed one, you enjoyed the best objects of the five senses for a long time on a soft bed. You enjoyed freely with your beloved and desired ones. ||172-176||

Page #483:
---------------------------
Chapter Sixty-Four

You enjoyed the desired pleasures with the women of your choice on a soft bed for a long time, with complete freedom. 172-176. You enjoyed divine food, which was full of all tastes and competed with nectar, satisfying your tongue. 177. In that same three-sided existence, you satisfied both nostrils for a long time with fragrant incense, garlands, powders, and other scents. 178. You also watched various dances performed by women, filled with rasa and emotion, and appropriate for different occasions. 179. You filled both your ears with the seven notes, starting with Sa, which have pure and native distinctions, and are born from both conscious and unconscious beings. 180. You experienced for a long time the mental pleasure born from the pride, "Everything that has arisen in this field, adorned with three parts, is mine." 181. Even after experiencing worldly pleasures in this way, you were not satisfied and, being devoid of right faith and the five vows, entered the seventh hell. 182. There, in the terrible river called Vaitarani, filled with boiling water, you were forced to bathe by the sinful hell-dwellers. 183. Sometimes, those hell-dwellers made you run on a mountain where large, round rocks were falling from the sky, with burning flames, and your entire body was torn apart by the rocks. 184. Sometimes, your eight limbs were burned by the heat of the sand of the furnace, and sometimes, your entire body was burned to ashes by being thrown into a burning pyre. 185. Sometimes, you were ground to powder by the blows of extremely hot, heated iron clubs, and sometimes, you were repeatedly spun around in a forest covered with sword-like leaves. 186. You were tormented by various birds, wild animals, and dogs like Yama, and you were also afflicted by their mutual fighting and beating. 187. The hell-dwellers, with wicked intentions, bound you with various types of bonds with great cruelty, and they cut your ears, lips, nose, etc., causing you great pain. 188. The sinful hell-dwellers sometimes impaled you on various sharp spikes. In this way, you experienced many kinds of suffering there for a long time, being helpless. 189. There, you filled the directions with the sounds of your cries, lamentations, and weeping, and, in great misery, you sought refuge in vain. 190.

Page #484:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that after becoming a lion, he was afflicted by hunger, thirst, wind, heat, rain, etc. (19) Being tormented, he again ate flesh by killing animals. Being cruel, he accumulated sin and went to the first hell. (19) Then, arising from there, carrying such cruelty, he again eagerly engaged in great sin for suffering. (193) Alas, your ignorance has grown so much that due to its influence, you do not know the truth. Hearing this, he was reminded of his past life. (194) Immediately, he remembered his past life and was overwhelmed by the terrible suffering of the cycle of birth and death. His whole body trembled with fear, and tears flowed from his eyes. (195) Tears flowed from his eyes for a long time, as if the falsehood was being expelled from his heart to make room for right belief. (196) The sorrow that arises from repentance for those who remember their past lives is not experienced by anyone else. (197) Seeing that his heart was calm and he was looking at him, the sage said, "This one will surely take his own good now." (198) In the past, you were Pururava, a hunter, and then, by practicing dharma, you became a god in the Saudharma heaven. From there, you descended to this earth and became Marichi, a very evil-minded being. (199) You corrupted the right path and promoted the wrong path. You disregarded the words of Vrishabha Swami and wandered in the world. Due to the accumulation of sins, you experienced the suffering of birth, old age, and death, and you endured the intense suffering of separation from the beloved and association with the unloved for a long time. You wandered in the realms of the immobile and mobile beings for countless years. (200-202) For some reason, you attained the state of Vishvanandi and then, by practicing restraint, you attained the position of Triprishtha Narayana. (203) From here, in your tenth birth, you will be the last Tirthankara. I have heard all this from Shridhara Tirthankara. (204) O wise one, from today onwards, abandon the wrong path that leads to the forest of the cycle of birth and death, and delight in the path that benefits the soul, and remain absorbed in it. (205) If you desire your own welfare and want to be in the highest abode of the world, then have faith in the teachings of the Agamas. (206)

Page #485:
---------------------------
Chapter Sixty-Seven

Having taken the teachings of the Muni into his heart, and humbled by the weight of devotion to the pair of Yogis, the lion circled them repeatedly and bowed down.  Having attained faith in the principles, he quickly received the blessings of time, etc.  He fixed his mind and took the vows of a Shravaka.  

The words of the Muni dispelled his cruelty and compassion entered his heart.  It is right, for who can overcome an enemy without the power of time?  

His fierce nature, due to the cessation of the obscuring karma, became steady, and he quickly adopted the peaceful state, like an actor.  

He did not take any ordinary vows, for he had no food other than meat.  The Acharyas say, what greater courage could there be?  

Since he had kept his vow unbroken, even at the cost of his life, it was clear that his bravery had borne fruit, and his former bravery had become his undoing.  

Those who are in the seventh hell, called Tamas-Tama-Prabha, naturally take to right faith.  Therefore, there is no surprise in the lion taking to right faith.  

He, the wise one, desiring the supreme state, renounced all evil conduct and stood before all good conduct.  He remained without food for a long time.  

The scriptures say, "There are no vows beyond those of the Tiryanchas."  Therefore, he had stopped, otherwise he would have certainly attained liberation.  He was the subject of this saying.  

Just as heated gold cools down when placed in cold water, so too his bravery, which had been kindled by cruelty, was completely extinguished at that time.  

The term "lion" lost its meaning for him, who had embraced compassion.  It is right, for the nature of those who are dependent often becomes like that of their master.  

He did not appear to be merely a picture drawn on the bodies of living beings, but he was so peaceful in his mind that no one was afraid of him.  It is right, for such is the greatness of compassion.  

Thus, having taken renunciation along with the vows, he died with a concentrated mind, and quickly became a god named Simhaketu in the Saudharma heaven.  

There, he lived for the duration of two oceans, free from sorrow and suffering.  He emerged from the region of the Mandara mountain, which is located in the region of the Dhātaki mountain.  

If you wish to remain steadfast, then embrace the faith in the Apta Agama and the principles.

Page #486:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, in the Videha region, in the Mangalavati country, on the Khecharachala mountain, there was a city called Kanakaprabha, situated on the northern slopes of the mountain, shining like gold.  || 22 || The king of this city was Kanakapundaka, a king of the Vidyadharas, and his beloved queen was Kanakamala, and their son was Kanakojjvala. || 222 || One day, Kanakojjvala went to the Mandara mountain to play with his wife, Kanakavalya. There, he saw the sage Priyamitra, a knower of the future. || 223 || Kanakojjvala, with devotion, circumambulated the sage and bowed down to him, asking, "O venerable one, please tell me the nature of Dharma." || 224 || The sage replied, "Dharma is full of compassion. Take refuge in Dharma. Through Dharma, you will attain liberation. Through Dharma, break the bonds of karma. Cultivate a good mind for Dharma. Do not abandon Dharma. Accept the servitude of Dharma. Remain steadfast in Dharma. Always think, 'O Dharma, protect me.'" || 225-226 || "By firmly establishing yourself in Dharma and constantly contemplating its various aspects, you will attain liberation in a short time." || 227 || Hearing these words, Kanakojjvala, filled with joy, took them to heart, and drank the nectar of Dharma, like a thirsty man drinking water. || 228 || He renounced all worldly possessions, freed himself from the bondage of desires, and practiced self-control for a long time. Finally, he attained liberation and became a god in the seventh heaven. || 229 || He enjoyed the pleasures of that heaven for the duration of thirteen oceans, and then, with a peaceful mind, he left that heaven. || 230 || He was reborn as the son of King Vajrasena, the ruler of Saketa, in the Kosala country, in this Jambudvipa, born to his queen, Shilavati. || 231 || His name was Harishena, and he was naturally endowed with qualities that brought joy to all. He subdued the goddess of fortune, making her his own, like a king's wife. || 232 || Finally, he renounced all worldly possessions, like a garland without its flowers, and sought liberation. He went to the great sage Shruta Sagar, who was adorned with the highest vows and knowledge of the scriptures, and took initiation from him. || 233 || Harishena, whose vows were constantly growing, attained liberation after his lifespan ended, and was reborn as a god in the Mahashukra heaven. There, he enjoyed the pleasures of that heaven for the duration of sixteen oceans. || 234 || Just as the rising sun sets, so too did this god reach the end of his lifespan.

Page #487:
---------------------------
Chaturhsaptatimatam Parva

In the city of Pushkalāvatī, the king was Pundarīkiṇī. His famous wife was Manoramā. Their son was the renowned Priyamitra, who was adorned with the ornaments of good conduct. He had subdued all his enemies merely by his name. After enjoying all kinds of pleasures, he became detached from worldly affairs, renounced his kingdom, and took diksha along with a thousand kings. He attained the state of a Tīrthaṅkara, and after the end of his lifespan, he went to the Pushpottara Vimāna and became the supreme deva. His lifespan was twenty-two Sāgaras, and he possessed the pure Śukla-leśyā. He would breathe once in twenty-two years, and would consume the nectar of the mind once in twenty-two thousand years. His Avadhi-jñāna could perceive up to the sixth earth.

Page #488:
---------------------------
460
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana was refined by the gods and goddesses, including the Samanikas. It was immersed in the ocean of happiness due to the special rise of its merit. 250 || When six months of his life remained and he was about to go to heaven, a large stream of seven and a half crore rons rained down daily in the courtyard of the palace of King Siddhatha in the country of Videha, belonging to this Bharat region. 251-252 ||
On the sixth day of the bright fortnight of Ashadha, when the moon was in the Uttarashadha constellation, the happy-minded queen Priyakarini of King Siddhatha was sleeping on a bed of jewels adorned with swan-feathers, etc., in the Nandyaavarta palace, illuminated by jeweled lamps, inside the seven-storeyed palace. When the three watches of the night, called Raudra, Rakshasa, and Gandharva, had passed, and the end of the fourth watch, called Manohara, was approaching, she saw sixteen dreams in a half-awake state. After the sixteen dreams, she saw another elephant entering her mouth. Then, she woke up in the morning due to the sound of the drums and the auspicious chants recited by the charanas and magadhas. She quickly bathed and put on holy clothes and ornaments and went to King Siddhatha. There, she bowed down and sat on the half-seat given by the king and began to narrate the dreams in order. The king also told her the future results of the dreams in order. 253-256 ||
Hearing the results of the dreams, she was so satisfied as if she had received their results at that very moment. Then, all the gods came and performed the auspicious ceremony of the conception of King Siddhatha and Queen Priyakarini with great pomp. They appointed the gods and goddesses to their respective duties and after doing all this, they went to their respective places. 260-261 ||
Then, on the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, when the ninth month was complete, in the auspicious yoga called Aryama, just as the sun rises in the east, the moon rises in the night, the flow of the Ganga arises in the lake called Padma, the accumulation of wealth appears on earth, the group of words arises in Saraswati, and the rise of happiness arises in Lakshmi, in the same way, a son named Achyutendra was born to that queen. That son was the ornament of his family, a great house of virtue, a mine of jewel-like qualities, a famous
1 Darasuta Kha, Ga, Gha. 2 Yathachintya-Gha. Yathaavaka-iti Kachit. Alankarah Kulasyahasampadaamalayomahaan La. 14 Vishrutashriyam La.

Page #489:
---------------------------
The 47th Chapter
461
The Sun was the support, the lotus-like brothers were the bloom, the Lord of the three worlds, the giver of the bliss of liberation, the protector of all beings, radiant like the Sun, the destroyer of the cycle of birth and death, the penetrator of the essence of karma, the bearer of the burden of the Dharma-tirtha, pure, the ocean of bliss, and the one Sun illuminating both the world and the beyond. || 262-267 || The Queen Priyakarini, by giving birth to that child, had generated immense love in humans, gods, and animals, thus her name Priyakarini was justified. || 268 || At that time, the lotus-like faces of all beings suddenly shone, and flowers rained down from the sky like tears of joy. || 269 || The group of drums made a sound, the group of women danced, the group of singers sang, and the group of prisoners recited auspicious verses. || 270 || All the gods descended from their abodes, leaving them desolate. Then, the Lord of the Saudharma Heaven, holding the illusory child in front of his mother, placed the child, radiant like the Sun, on the back of the elephant Airavata. The light of the child illuminated the ten directions, and surrounded by gods, Indra reached Mount Meru. There, he placed the Jina child on the lion throne on the Panduka rock and performed his ablution with shining pots filled with the water of the Ocean of Milk, and praised him as follows: "O Lord! Your soul is extremely pure, and your body is made of pure pudgala particles, so how can it be purified by impure and contemptible water? We have performed this ablution inspired by your Tirthankara name-karma, or it is an Amnaya, a special action that takes place at the birth of a Tirthankara, and therefore we have come to be your servants." || 271-275 || What more to say? Indra, with devotion, adorned him with the best ornaments and gave him the two names, "Vira" and "Srivardhamana." || 276 || Then, surrounded by all the gods, Indra brought the Jina child back and placed him in his mother's lap, performed the play of joy with great celebration, adorned his parents, celebrated the festival, and after doing all this, bowed to Srivardhamana Swami and went to his abode with the gods. || 277-278 ||
1 Samvaridhi: Lo. 2 Jagau cha Ma, Lo. 3 Vira: Srivardhamanarateshvitya-Lo. 4 Swadhama: Lo. 1

Page #490:
---------------------------
462
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapuraana, in the lineage of Parveshtitirtha, in the year 520, the great hero Mahavira was born. || 279 || His lifespan was seventy-two years, slightly less. He was adorned with all auspicious marks, and was born with the ten qualities, including being free from sweat. || 280 || He was free from the seven fears and was adorned with all kinds of virtues. || 281 || When Sanjaya and Vijay, two charanas, had doubts about something, they came to him immediately after his birth. Seeing him, their doubts were dispelled. || 282 || Seeing their doubts dispelled, the charanas, out of devotion, said, "This child is destined to be a Tirthankara." Thus, he was named Sanmati. || 283 || What need is there to speak of words that describe qualities? Even words that have no meaning for others, become meaningful when applied to him. || 284 || This was the flaw in his renunciation, that words which describe flaws, become meaningless when applied to him, while they are very meaningful when applied to others. || 285 || He had no affection for Lakshmi or fame, just as a person with auspicious marks is primarily attracted to qualities. || 286 || Due to the force of time, age, and desire, Kubera himself brought him all the essential objects of enjoyment from heaven, and spent them on him. || 287 || One day, in Indra's court, there was a discussion among the gods about who was the most valiant at that time. Hearing this, a god named Sangama came to test him. || 288 || Seeing the radiant prince Vardhamana, playing on a tree in the garden, with many other princes of his age, all adorned with hair like crows, Sangama, desiring to frighten him, took the form of a large serpent. || 289 || He wrapped himself around the tree from its roots to its trunk. Seeing him, all the boys trembled in fear and jumped down from the branches and ran away as best they could. This is natural, because when great fear arises, no one can stand except a great man. || 290-293 ||
1. Madasaptaka-lo. 2. Tatsandehagata lo. 3. Tyago'yameva lo. 4. Doshabhidhaayinah ka., ma. +-nyarnisham kha., lo. 16-madhisthitah.lo.

Page #491:
---------------------------
## Chapter Forty-Seven

The Kumar, fearless, played on the serpent that appeared terrifying with its hundred hoods, as he used to play on his mother's bed. || 29 || The Sangamadeva, whose ocean of joy was surging, praised the Lord and named him "Mahavira." || 295 || Thus, thirty years passed in his Kumarakāla. Then, on the very next day, due to the complete cessation of the knowledge-obscuring karma, the Great Enlightenment arose, and he remembered his past lives. || 296 || The Laukāntika Devas, having attained their desired objects, praised him with appropriate hymns. || 297 || The entire assembly of Devas performed the auspicious ceremony of his departure. He, with sweet words, pleased his relatives and took leave of them. || 298 || Then, the Lord, who was steadfast in his vows, mounted the palanquin named Chandraprabha. This palanquin was first lifted by the kings of the earth, then by the Vidyadhara kings, and finally by Indra. On both sides of him, groups of fly-whisks were waving. Thus, he reached the forest named Shaṇḍa, which seemed to be calling him with the buzzing of bees and the sweet calls of cuckoos, laughing with the abundance of flowers, and expressing its love with its red leaves. || 299-301 || The most excellent Lord Mahavira, having reached the Shaṇḍa forest, descended from his palanquin and sat facing north on a large, jeweled stone, covered with his own radiance, and took the vow of Teli. Thus, on the tenth day of the dark fortnight of Margashirsha, when the moon was in the middle of the Hasta and Uttara Phalguni constellations, at the end of the day, the extremely valiant Lord Mahavira, with great fortitude, turned towards his austerities. || 302-304 || It was proper that Indra himself picked up the clothes, ornaments, etc., that the Lord had discarded, for such was the Lord's greatness. || 305 || The fragrant unguent on the Lord's body was thinking, "How can I leave this excellent Lord?" With this thought, it remained on his body, as if enjoying his glory. || 306 || Knowing that dirty and crooked things are worshipped by the ignorant, but are to be abandoned by those seeking liberation, the young Lord, as if, uprooted his dirty and crooked (black and dull) hair from the root and threw them away. || 307 || 

**Notes:**

* **Kumarakāla:** The period of childhood and youth.
* **Laukāntika Devas:** Devas who are concerned with the affairs of the world.
* **Teli:** A vow of complete silence and self-discipline.
* **Margashirsha:** The ninth month of the Hindu calendar.
* **Hasta and Uttara Phalguni:** Two constellations in the Hindu zodiac.

Page #492:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

The Lord of the Gods, Indra, took all the Keśas in his hand, placed them in a blazing casket of jewels, worshipped them, honored them, covered them with various kinds of radiant garments, and then, with the Gods, went himself and placed them in the ocean of milk.

The Tapolakshmi, like the desired object of Mokshalakshmi and the four Dhatus, embraced them herself.

It is proper that their Nirgranthapana should be well adorned by the abandonment of internal attachments, for just as the snake's mere shedding of its skin is not beautiful, so too is the mere abandonment of external attachments not beautiful.

At that time, the fourth Manahparyaya Jnana, like the knowledge of Keval Jnana, was also dedicated to those Lords by Samayam.

Having gone to the Aparamatta Gunasthan, those Lords obtained the necklace of the kingdom of Moksha, which is the form of Tapascharan. How can it be obtained by a careless being?

The first Samayik Charitra was for those Lords who possessed the Manahparyaya Jnana-like eye and were adorned with natural strength, for the second is only for careless beings.

I had taken vows in the forest in the Simha Paryaya itself, according to the teachings of the Muni Raj. Thinking thus, as if they had kept in mind the unity with the lion, they adopted the Simha Vritti.

Although they did not have sharp claws and sharp teeth like a lion, they were not like a lion, nor did they have red hair on their necks like a lion, yet they imitated the lion by these three qualities: bravery, being alone, and dwelling in the forest.

All the Gods, bowing to those Lords and praising their courage, went to their respective places with contented minds.

Then, on the day of Parana, the Bhattaraka Mahavira Swami went out of the forest for food and reached the city of Kulgram, which was as beautiful as the city of the Vidyadharas. There, the king named Kul, whose radiance was like the flower of Priyangu, saw them with devotion, circumambulated them three times, bowed his head at their feet, and considered them as a treasure that had come to his house. The king seated those Lords, who had taken the best vows, in a good place, worshipped them with Arghya, etc., adorned the ground near their feet with perfumes, etc., and offered them Paramanna (a meal of milk), which was a purifier of mind, speech, and body, and which fulfilled their desired purpose.

Page #493:
---------------------------
The 74th chapter is called Anushabhik. This is the immediate result of your donation, but the future result is much greater. It is as if five wonders have rained down on your house.  || 322 ||  To increase the merit of his disciples, the hero, the Lord, left his house with the desire to perform austerities in secluded places according to the rules. || 323 ||  The forest of the world, filled with trees of objects, infested with hunters of senses, full of terrible and dreadful creatures of the world, filled with hundreds of herds of elephants intoxicated with passions, terrifying with countless serpents with open mouths, harsh with four types of calamities like fierce lions, and surrounded by thieves in the form of groups of demons, this forest of the world was gradually abandoned by the Supreme Man, who is worthy of being served by the virtuous, who is full of uninterrupted happiness, who is filled with noble people, who is vast and free from all kinds of disturbances. || 324-326 ||  He entered the forest of austerities, accompanied by great lords in the form of great vows, following the best principles, very powerful with the three revealed powers of right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, armed with the weapon of conduct, wearing the armor of a group of virtues, walking on the path of purity, and aided by noble intentions. || 327-328 ||  There, without any doubt, he engaged in many yogas and, residing in a secluded place, repeatedly contemplated the ten types of righteous meditation. || 330 ||  Then, one day, the extremely valiant and heroic Lord Vardhamana was seated in the cremation ground called Atimuktaka in Ujjayini, in the posture of the image. Seeing him, Mahadeva, a Rudra, wanted to test his patience with his wickedness. He created many large vetalas in the form of ghosts at night, who wanted to enter each other's bellies by peeling off their sharp skin, who looked very terrifying with their open mouths, who were dancing in various rhythms, and who were attacking with harsh words, laughter, and terrible looks. Besides these, he created an army of Kiratas with serpents, elephants, lions, fire, and wind. Thus, that Rudra, who was skilled in acquiring only sin, tried to distract him from his meditation with many terrible calamities caused by the power of his knowledge. || 331-335 ||  Unable to shake his mind from meditation, he praised him with various praises, calling him Mahavir. || 336 ||

Page #494:
---------------------------
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana, Umā, the consort of the Lord, praised and worshipped him. Even sinful beings are pleased by the clear display of heroic deeds.

Once, the daughter of King Chetaka, named Candanā, was engrossed in forest play. Seeing her, a certain Vidyādhara, afflicted by the arrows of Kāma, somehow managed to take her away. Later, fearing his own wife, he abandoned that maiden in the great forest.

A certain forest-dweller, seeing her there, handed her over to the merchant Vṛṣabhadatta out of a desire for wealth. The merchant's wife, named Subhadrā, became suspicious that her husband might have a relationship with her. Filled with anger, she always kept Candanā bound with a chain, feeding her rice cooked with millet, mixed with mud in a clay pot.

One day, the great Arhat Mahāvīra, while wandering for alms, entered the city of Kauśāmbī. Seeing him enter the city, Candanā went forward to meet him. At that moment, all her chains broke, her long, dark, curling hair became agitated like a swarm of bees, the garland of Mallikā flowers fell from her, her ornaments and clothes became beautiful, and she became endowed with the merit of nine types of piety, bowing down with devotion. The wise woman, with proper respect, offered food to the Mahāvīra, and as a result, five wonders occurred, and she was reunited with her kinsmen.

Meanwhile, the Blessed Lord Vardhamāna also spent twelve years in the state of concealment. One day, he was seated in the meditation posture on a magnificent slab of jewels, under a Sāla tree, on the banks of the Ṛjukūlā river, in the delightful forest near the Jambhīka village. On the tenth day of the bright half of the month of Vaiśākha, in the afternoon, when the moon entered the space between Hasta and Uttarā Phālgunī, he ascended the Kṣapaka series, purified by the bright meditation.

Page #495:
---------------------------
The Forty-Seventh Chapter
467
Having eradicated the four karmas, he attained the four infinite qualities and became the abode of thirty-four atiśayas. || 352 ||
He became the holder of the sa-yoga-kevali guna-sthāna, fulfilling his own and others' purposes, and adorned the sky-like courtyard, bearing a supremely generous body. || 353 ||
At that time, the Indra of the Saudharma heaven arrived with the four types of gods, and he completed all the rituals of the knowledge-kalyaṇaka-related worship. || 354 ||
Possessing the atiśayas of the worship of the supremely generous body of merit and the creation of the samavasaraṇa, Śrī Vardhamāna Svāmī became known as the Parameṣṭhī and attained the state of the Paramātman. || 355 ||
Then, Indra pondered the reason for the divine sound of the Lord, and, knowing the reason through the third eye of knowledge, he became very satisfied. || 356 ||
At that very moment, he came to my village. I was there, a superior Brāhmaṇa named Indra-bhūti, of the Gautama gotra, very proud, born there by the remaining merit, with a body that shone brightly, having come from the vimāna called Āditya, and I was a knower of the Vedas and Vedāṅgas. || 357-358 ||
Seeing me, he brought me to the Lord by some means and urged me to ask whatever I wanted to ask about the nature of the jīva. || 359 ||
Hearing Indra's words, I asked the Lord, "O Bhagavan! Is there a thing called jīva, or not? Please tell me its nature." In response, the Lord, who is compassionate to the worthy, said, "There is a thing called jīva, and it is the measure of the body that is taken, its nature is described by the sat-saṅkhyā, etc., the sat-ādik, and the nirdeśa, etc., the kim-ādik. It is not born or destroyed in the form of dravya, but it undergoes transformation every moment in the form of paryaya. Consciousness is its characteristic, it is the doer, the enjoyer, and the knower of one part and all parts of things." || 360-362 ||
It is described in two ways, by the difference between the samsārī and the mukta. Its samsāra has been going on since time immemorial, and mokṣa is considered to be its end. || 363 ||
The samsāra of a jīva who has attained mokṣa does not exist, that is, it does not return to samsāra. The samsāra of some jīvas is eternal, that is, because of being abhavya or dūrāhavya, it remains in samsāra forever. In this samsāra, countless jīvas have attained mokṣa, and countless jīvas are still remaining. In the bondage of karma,
1. parāpta-iti kvacit.
2. prāpa m., l.
3. ko'sāvītyupa-l.
4. -dityabhāsuraṁ l.
5. saha-kṣitā k, kh, g, gh, m.

Page #496:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**468**

The Uttarapurana, a part of the Mahapuraana, explained the true nature of the soul through logic. It stated that the soul is a substance and its existence is due to time and other factors.  || 366 ||  Having understood this, I, a devotee of the Lord, became certain about the nature of the soul. I was honored by Sudharma and, along with five hundred Brahmana sons, I bowed down to Shri Vardhamana.  || 367 ||  At that very moment, due to the special purification of my soul, I attained seven Siddhis.  || 368 ||  Through the teachings of Bhattaraka, on the first day of the month of Shravana, I clearly understood the meaning and the words of all the Angas.  || 369 ||  Similarly, on the same day, in the afternoon, I understood the meaning and the words of all the Purvas in sequence.  || 370 ||  Thus, I, who possessed knowledge of all the Angas and Purvas and was endowed with four knowledges, composed the Angas during the first part of the night and the Purvas during the latter part.  || 371 ||  From that time, I became the author of the scriptures.  || 372 ||  Filled with the knowledge of the scriptures, I became the first Ganadhara of Lord Mahavira.  || 373 ||  After me, there were other Ganadharas: Vayubhuti, Agnibhuti, Sudharma, Maury, Maundraya, Putra, Maitreya, Akampana, Andhavela, and Prabhasa.  || 374 ||  Thus, including me, there were eleven Ganadharas who were worshipped by the Indras of Lord Vardhamana.  || 375 ||  Besides these, there were three hundred and eleven Anga-holders and fourteen Purva-holders, nine thousand nine hundred teachers who practiced true restraint, one thousand three hundred Avadhijnani, seven hundred Kevalajnani Paramesthis, nine hundred holders of Vikriya Siddhi, five hundred worshipful Manahparyaya Jnani, and four hundred Anuttaravadi.  || 376 ||  Thus, the total number of Muni-shwaras was fourteen thousand.  || 377 ||  There were thirty-six thousand Aryikas, starting with Chandana, one lakh Shravakas, three lakh Shravikas, countless Devas and Devis, and a countable number of Tiryanchas.  || 378 ||  Thus, surrounded by the twelve Ganadharas mentioned above, the Lord, seated on his throne, explained the six substances, seven principles, the world, and liberation in the Ardhamagadhi language.  || 379 ||  || 380 ||  || 381 ||

**Note:**  The terms "Anga" and "Purva" are Jain scriptures.  "Siddhi" refers to supernatural powers attained through spiritual practice.  "Ganadhara" is a disciple of a Tirthankara.  "Muni-shwara" is a Jain monk.  "Shravaka" and "Shravika" are lay followers of Jainism.  "Tiryancha" refers to animals.  "Avadhijnani" is someone who has the power of clairvoyance.  "Kevalajnani" is someone who has omniscience.  "Vikriya Siddhi" is the power to control one's body and senses.  "Manahparyaya Jnani" is someone who can read the minds of others.  "Anuttaravadi" is someone who has attained the highest level of spiritual knowledge.

Page #497:
---------------------------
The 74th Chapter

* All this is explained in detail by means of the means of proof, reasoning, and deposition. 
* Some of the learned assembly members, endowed with natural intelligence, took to austerity, some took to austerity and non-austerity, and some, due to the special quality of their auspiciousness, quickly attained right faith. 
* Thus, the Lord Vardhamana, preaching the Dharma, arrived at Rajagriha in due course and stayed there on the mountain called Vipulachala. 
* O Magadhesa! When you heard the news of the Lord's arrival, you came here immediately. 
* Hearing all this, King Shrenik was very pleased, he bowed to them repeatedly, and filled with emotion and detachment, he inquired about his past lives. 
* In response, the Ganadhara Swami also explained that you had previously asked about the Purana of the sixty-three Lakshanas, which I had clearly told you, and you had also clearly heard it. 
* O Shravikauttama Shrenik! Now I will tell you the story of your three births, so listen with your mind steady. 
* In this Jambudvipa, on the Vindhyachala mountain, there is a forest called Kutaja, in which a Kirata named Khadirasara lived at one time. 
* One day, he saw the Muni Raja named Samadhigupta and greeted him with great joy. 
* In response, the Muni Raja blessed him, saying, "May you gain Dharma today." 
* Then the Kirata asked, "O Lord! What is Dharma? And what is the benefit from it?" 
* In response to the Kirata's question, the Muni Raja said, "To be detached from the consumption of honey, meat, etc., which is the cause of sin, is called Dharma. 
* To obtain that Dharma is called Dharma-labha. 
* From that Dharma, one gets punya, and from punya, one gets supreme happiness in heaven." 
* Hearing this, the Kirata said, "I cannot be worthy of such Dharma." 
* Understanding his intention, the Muni Raja said, "O Bhavy! Have you ever eaten crow meat before?" 
* Hearing the Muni Raja's words, the Kirata, who was the best among the wise, thought and said, "I have never eaten that." 
* In response, the Muni Raja said, "If that is the case, then you should give it up." 
* Hearing the Muni Raja's words, he was very pleased and said, "O Lord! Please give me this vow." 
* Then, after bowing to him, he left. 
* Once, when a hunter was hunting, he ate crow meat.

Page #498:
---------------------------
The Bhil, having taken a vow, went away. At one point, the Bhil fell ill with an incurable disease. The physicians then advised that eating crow meat could cure the disease. In response, the Bhil resolutely replied, "Let my life depart! What use do I have for these fickle breaths? I have taken a vow in the presence of the ascetic-muniraj, desiring Dharma. How can a man who breaks his vow be considered a man of vow? I do not wish to live by consuming this sinful meat." Having said this, he did not agree to eat crow meat. Hearing this, his brother-in-law, Shuravira, who had come from the city of Sarasaukhya, said, "When I was coming here, I saw a woman weeping beneath a banyan tree in the middle of a dense forest. Seeing her weep, I asked her why she was crying. In response, she said, 'Listen with your mind focused. I am the Yakshi of the forest and I reside in this forest. Your brother-in-law, Khadirasara, is suffering from a disease called Khadirasara. If he abandons crow meat, he will become my husband! But now you are going to feed him the abandoned meat and make him a recipient of the terrible sufferings of the hellish realm. That is why I am weeping. O Bhadra! Now abandon your insistence.'"

Hearing the words of the goddess, Shuravira went to the sick Khadirasara and, seeing him, said, "The medicine that the physician has prescribed, if not for any other reason, should be consumed by you for my happiness." Khadirasara, rejecting his words, said, "You are my brother, like my own life. Out of affection, you are saying this to keep me alive, but living by breaking a vow is not beneficial, because breaking a vow is the cause of attaining a miserable state." When Shuravira was certain that he was steadfast in his vow, he told him the story of the Yakshi.

Considering the story of the Yakshi, Khadirasara adopted the five vows of a Shravaka, due to which, upon the completion of his lifespan, he became an unparalleled deva in the Saudharma heaven. On the other hand, Shuravira was very saddened and, after performing the rites for the afterlife, went towards his home. On the way, he stood near the same banyan tree and said to the Yakshi, "O Yakshi! Did our brother-in-law become your husband?" In response, the Yakshi said, "No, he is endowed with all the vows, and he is averse to the realm of the dead. How could he become my husband in the Saudharma heaven?"

Page #499:
---------------------------
The forty-seventh chapter, the king of the forest, is the enjoyer of excellent divine enjoyments. The essence of the truth, the words of the truth, meditate on the greatness of the vow, O Mahaatma! || 414 || Thinking that it would give him the desired happiness, he went to the Samadhi-gupta Muni and took the vow of a Shravak. || 415 || Considering him to be a worthy soul, the Yakshi, out of partiality for him, brought him to Jain Dharma by this means, for she was a well-wisher. || 416 || Even the Khadira-sara, from heaven, after enjoying divine enjoyments for two oceans of years, fell from heaven due to the cause. || 417 || You, the son of the king of Kunika, were born to the glorious queen. And then, on another occasion, your father wanted to know who among my sons would be the king. || 418 || Examining all the auspicious signs, he was very satisfied and naturally loved you. || 419 || Having decided that you were the rightful heir, fearing danger, the wise man, with feigned anger, drove you away from the kingdom to protect you from the heirs. || 420 || Fearing the king's open order, all the people of Nandigram, fearing the king's open order, did not rise to greet you, nor did they provide you with the facilities of bathing, food, and sleep. They were averse to all this. || 421 || Then you also went with a Brahmin, and with great love, you narrated stories that refuted the ignorance of gods, castes, and heretics, and reached his place. || 422 || The Brahmin, attracted by your eloquence, youth, and other qualities, gave you his young daughter in marriage. You married her and lived happily there for a long time. || 423-425 || Once, for some reason, King Kunika wanted to abandon his kingdom. He then called you from the Brahmin's village, gave you his entire kingdom, and you also ruled the kingdom. Although you did not outwardly express your anger, you remembered the previous disrespect. || 426-427 || He wanted to punish the people of Nandigram. He ordered them to do a task that was very difficult to accomplish. || 428 ||

Page #500:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, a son named Abhayavaya was born to a Brahmin girl. One day, he was coming from his home to see you with his mother. When he arrived in Nandigrama, he saw the people there very distressed by you. So he stayed there and calmed your anger with appropriate measures. 

Your son, Abhay, was skilled in various ways, so at that time, the wise people called him "Pandit." 

O King! Today you are present here with that wise son, listening to the Puranas. Hearing the words of Ganadhara Swami, King Shrenik reflected on them in his heart and said, "O Bhagavan! Although my faith in Jainism is very strong, why am I unable to take vows?"

After King Shrenik's question was finished, Ganadhara Swami said, "In this very life, you have bound yourself to the hellish existence of Narakayu, which cannot be released without bearing fruit. This is due to your attachment to pleasures, the intense rise of falsehood, bad character, and great beginnings. It is a rule that one who has bound himself to another life, abandoning the life of a deva, cannot take vows in that period. However, he can embrace Samyagdarshan. This is why you are unable to take vows despite your desire."

Thus, through the purification arising from listening to the Puranas, he attained the three results: Adhokarana, Apurvakarana, and Anivrittikarana. Due to their influence, he attained the first, or Upasham, Samyagdarshan, which is the pacifier of the seven categories of Mohaniya Karma.

After a short time, his Samyaktva nature arose, and he became a Chala-chala-atmaka, Kshayo-pashamika Samyagdarshan. Soon after, he destroyed the seven categories completely and attained Kshayika Samyagdarshan. Samyagdarshan is said to be of ten types, depending on its origin: Agyna, Marg, Upadeshoth, Sutra-samudbhav, Beej-samudbhav, Sanksepaj, Vistara-j, Arthaj, Avagaadh, and Parama-avagaadh.

The faith that arises in the six substances, etc., due to the command of the omniscient deity, is called Agyna Samyaktva. The path to liberation is devoid of possessions, clothing, and is in the form of a hand-held vessel. Hearing the nature of the path to liberation, the faith that arises is called Marg-j Samyaktva.

Page #501:
---------------------------
The Forty-Seventh Chapter

473.  Shraddha (faith) arises immediately, like an ocean of teachings. It is quickly understood from the scriptures, which speak of the various types of austerities, beginning with the Acharaanga. 443.  The taste (ruchi) that arises from these is called Sutraja (arising from the Sutras). 444.  The taste that arises from the subtle meaning of the seeds (bija) is called Beejaj (arising from the seeds). 445.  The taste that arises from the concise explanation of the objects (padartha) is called Sanksepaj (arising from the concise explanation). The taste that arises from the detailed explanation of the same is called Vistaraj (arising from the detailed explanation). 446.  The taste that arises from understanding the principles, the means of understanding, the deviations, and other means, through detailed explanations, is called Vistaraj (arising from the detailed explanation). 447.  The taste that arises from the understanding of the principles, as explained in the Angas, is called Angadibhasit (arising from the Angas). 448.  The taste that arises from the understanding of the meaning alone, without the detailed explanation of the words, from a great teacher, is called Arthaj (arising from the meaning). 449.  The taste that arises from the contemplation of the harmony between the Angas, the external scriptures, and the inner self, is called Samudrata (like an ocean). 450.  The faith that arises from the diminishing of delusion is called Avagaadha (deep). 451.  The taste that arises from the understanding of all things, as seen through the knowledge of the Self, is called Paramavagaadha (supremely deep). This is what the great sages say. 452.  O great one, among these faiths, you have many today. 453.  Besides these, there are sixteen pure causes, such as the purity of vision, as described in the scriptures. 454.  A bhavya (future being) binds the karma of the name of a Tirthankara by all these causes, or by some of them, as they are obtained. 455.  You will bind the karma of the name of a Tirthankara by some of these causes, such as faith, and will enter the first earth, called Ratnaprabha. 456.  You will enjoy the fruits of that earth for a medium lifespan and then exit. 457.  Then, O bhavya, you will become the first Tirthankara of the future Utsarpini time, called Mahapadma, and you will bring welfare to the virtuous. 458.  You are a near bhavya, so do not fear the cycle of existence. 459.  King Srenic, who was saddened by the news of his attainment of the Ratnaprabha earth, asked again, "O master, who holds the wealth of wisdom, is there anyone else in this city, which is a house of merit, who will go to hell?" 460.  The Ganadhar Bhagavan replied, "Yes, in this city, Kalasaukarik and the daughter of a Brahmin, Shubha, will also enter hell." 461.  "Why will they enter hell?" 462.  "If you want to know, listen. Kalasaukarik was born in a low family in this city. Although he was very sinful before, he bound the karma of a human lifespan seven times due to the force of his bhava-sthiti (state of being). Now he remembers his past lives, and he always thinks like this..."

Page #502:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

If there is no connection between the souls and the fruits of merit and demerit, then how did I, a sinner, get a human birth? (458)

Therefore, there is neither merit nor demerit, and acting according to one's desires is happiness. Thinking this way, that sinner, without any fear, began to commit the five sins, including violence. He became attached to eating meat and other foods, and due to many beginnings and possessions, he has also bound himself to the highest hellish life. (459-460)

Therefore, he will go to the seventh earth, which gives terrible suffering. Similarly, Shubha is also endowed with the rise of the female Veda, born from intense karmic experiences. She is extremely polluted by excessive attachment, aversion, and gossip, and she gets very angry when she hears and sees the virtues, character, and good conduct. Due to constantly experiencing the consequences of her actions, she has bound herself to the hellish life, and after her body leaves, she will experience terrible suffering related to the earth of darkness. (461-463)

Thus, after the words of the Ganadhara ended, Abhay Kumar got up, bowed to him, and asked about his past lives. (464)

The Ganadhara, who is compassionate towards the liberated souls, wanting to benefit Abhay Kumar, said, "You were the son of a Brahmin in the third life from this one, and even though you were a liberated soul, you were foolish." He wandered to many countries to study the Vedas, and he was deluded by heresy, worship of gods, pilgrimage, caste, and worldly matters. He was confused and troubled by them, and he greatly praised their actions. He wanted to gain merit and therefore followed their actions himself. (465-467)

Once, he was traveling with a Jain traveler. On the way, near a pile of stones, there was a tree that was the abode of ghosts. Approaching it and considering it his god, the Brahmin son circumambulated the tree and bowed to it. Seeing this action, the Shravaka laughed and, to show disrespect, he plucked some leaves from the tree and used them to brush the dust off his feet. He said to the Brahmin, "Look, your god is not capable of doing anything to the Jains." In response, the Brahmin said, "Okay, so be it. What is the harm? I will also disrespect your god. You are my teacher in this matter." Saying this, they both continued walking together, and they reached another place. (468-472)

Page #503:
---------------------------
Chapter Forty-Seven

The Shravaka, seeing the cluster of vines called Kapiroma, said, "This is our deity." Having said this, he circumambulated it with devotion, prostrated himself, and stood there. The Brahmin, unaware of the true nature of things, became angry and, with his hands, tore off the leaves of the vine cluster, crushed them, and smeared the juice all over his body.  He was soon overcome by an unbearable itching caused by the vine juice and, fearing the Shravaka, said, "Surely your deity resides here." 

The Shravaka, hearing the Brahmin's words, laughed and said, "There is no other cause for the happiness and suffering of living beings than their past karma. There is no other root cause." 

"Therefore, strive to attain merit through austerities, charity, and other virtuous actions. Abandon this foolish attachment to deities, O wise one.  Deities, indeed, help virtuous people, but they are like servants and cannot do anything when merit is depleted."

Having thus dispelled the Brahmin's ignorance about deities, the Shravaka, accompanied by him, went to the bank of the Ganga River. 

The Brahmin, feeling hungry, bathed in the river, thinking, "This is the excellent pilgrimage site called Maniganga." Thus, he became attached to the pilgrimage site. 

Then, when the Brahmin wished to eat, the Shravaka, having eaten first, mixed Ganga water with his leftovers and, wishing to teach him what was right, gave it to him, saying, "This is pure, eat it." 

Seeing this, the Brahmin said, "How can I eat your leftovers? Don't you know my special status?" 

Hearing this, the Shravaka said, "If the pilgrimage water is not capable of removing the taint of leftovers today, how can it be capable of removing the taint of sin? Therefore, abandon this false belief, which is instilled by the ignorant and the foolish, that sin can be washed away by water. If sin were to be washed away by water, then what is the use of performing austerities and charity?"

"Water is readily available everywhere, so one should wash away sin with it. In truth, the fourfold bondage of falsehood, non-abstinence, carelessness, and passions binds one to intense sin, while the fourfold liberation of right faith, right knowledge, right conduct, and right effort leads to the end of sin."

"Accept this truth of Jainism," he said again.

Page #504:
---------------------------
476
Having heard the words of the Shruta in the Uttara Purana, the Brahmin rejected the Tirthamooḍhya. Then, right there, in the midst of the five fires, he performed austerities that were unbearable to others. || 488 ||
While the two ascetics were performing their austerities, the Shravaka, showing the constant killing of the six types of beings in the blazing fire, refuted the Brahmin's Pandamooḍhya with arguments. || 489 ||
Then, to dispel the Jaatimooḍhya, the Shravaka began to say that people become fallen by eating beef and associating with forbidden women, and this is seen. In this body, no difference is seen in terms of color and form, and it is seen that Brahmins, etc., are impregnated by Shudras, etc. Therefore, it seems that there is no difference in humans created by birth, like cows and horses. If there were some difference in form, then a difference created by birth would be considered, but there is no difference in form between Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras. Therefore, it is otherwise to imagine a difference in birth among them. || 490-491 ||
Those whose birth, lineage, etc., are due to Shukhladhyana are called Trivarna, and the rest are called Shudras. In the Videha realm, there is no break in the lineage of birth that is fit for liberation, because there is a continuous birth of beings with names and lineages that are the cause of that birth. But in the Bharat and Airavata realms, the lineage of birth continues only in the fourth time period, not in other time periods. This is how the division of Varna is described in the Jinaagama. || 492-495 ||
The Shravaka refuted the Brahmin's Jaatimooḍhya with these and other reasons. "Kubera resides on this banyan tree," etc. - believing such statements, kings perform actions that are worthy of them, worship, etc. Don't they know anything? There must be some truth in it, that's why they do it. This is the great, well-known path of the world, it cannot be abandoned. The words of worldly people, "Don't abandon the traditions that have been going on in the world," etc., are not acceptable because they are external to the Agama spoken by the Arhat, like the words of a drunkard or a madman. || 496-498 ||
Thus, the Shravaka also dispelled the Brahmin's Lokamooḍhya. Then the Brahmin said to the Shravaka, "The reason you gave, that worldly words are not acceptable because they are external to the Agama spoken by the Arhat, does not apply to me.
Because the Agamas of the Sankhya, etc., Arhats, are all flawed due to the fault of being human,
1. Luhi Rupa. 2. Madounmatka Lo. 3. Nirastuda Lo.
All people are contaminated by ignorance, etc., due to excessive attachment, etc. || 499-500 ||
Knowledge, conduct, and austerity bind punya. And finally, liberation is attained through these. This is the truth of the Jinenadra Deva - the original teachings. Accept it. The Shravaka said this to the Brahmin. || 486-487 ||

Page #505:
---------------------------
The 74th chapter, though not considered important, holds significance. For it addresses the complete eradication of passions and ignorance.  The application of the omniscience and freedom from passions is a means for the wise, who follow the principles of logic.  Passions and ignorance, though present, are not absolute, as their intensity varies.  Just as impurities like dirt are removed from gold by the presence of materials, so too can passions be removed from a person by practices like penance.  If this is not accepted, then the difference in intensity cannot be established, which is clearly observed.  If the root cause of passions is not eradicated, how can it be prevented?  The omniscience of the Jinas, who are masters of all scriptures and arts, is a secondary means to establish the primary omniscience.  Just as calling a man named Chaitra a lion establishes the existence of a primary lion, so too does this secondary omniscience establish the primary omniscience.  This application is not rejected for the sake of liberation, as powers vary based on the state, place, time, and other factors.  It is extremely difficult to understand the nature of things through inference.  Even if something is established through great effort by skilled inferrers, it can be refuted by others.  Just as a blind man, relying only on touch, is likely to stumble on the path, so too is one who relies solely on inference.  If you say that inference is unreliable, then the minds of great people will not be attracted to this.  If you consider logical arguments unreliable, then the Vedas, which are not created by humans, are also unreliable.  If you say that the Vedas are true, then why not consider the Vedas, which are created by humans, as true?  The argument of lack of cause applies equally to both sides.  Therefore, even after death, you will have to accept logical arguments.  When you accept logical arguments, then what I say will be accepted by you.  If you accept that the omniscient knows everything, then what is not known by him?  Therefore, wise people will not contradict what he says.

Page #506:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, the Uttara Purana: You, O learned one, are a proponent of the six pramanas, not a Charvaka, nor do you oppose me. Your statement that the use of inference is not accepted by me is not valid. || 514 || The relation between the object to be proved and the means of proof is called the hetu, which is the object of direct perception. How can there not be a valid inference from the means of proof itself? || 515 || Is it that there is perhaps some error in inference, but not in direct perception? No, error occurs in direct perception as well. Therefore, O learned one, abandon this insistence that inference is not a valid means of proof. || 516 || If it is said that direct perception is free from contradiction and therefore a valid means of proof, then why is inference not also a valid means of proof, since it is also free from contradiction? If this is your position, then what is the need for kings? Or, even if there is a lack of validity in the Samkhya and other schools of thought, because they are seen to be contradictory, there cannot be a lack of validity in the teachings of the Arhat, because they are seen to be consistent with direct perception. Thus, having heard all these truths spoken by the Jain follower, the Brahmin said, "The Dharma that you have embraced, that same Dharma shall be mine from this day forward." || 517-518 || Following the instructions of the Jain follower, the Brahmin embraced the pure Dharma spoken by the Jina. Just as medicine benefits a sick person, so too do the words of the virtuous ultimately benefit. || 520 || 

Then, as they were walking together, they lost their way in the dense forest, misled by the rise of evil. || 521 || The Jain follower thought, "Since this forest is devoid of humans, there is no one to show us the way. In this situation, there is no other recourse but to follow the teachings of the Jina. In such a situation, it is the wisdom of a warrior to renounce food and body." With this thought, he renounced the world and sat down for deep meditation. Seeing the Jain follower sitting, the Brahmin, whose mind had been purified by his teachings, also sat down in the same way, following the rules of meditation. At the end of his life, the Brahmin,

Page #507:
---------------------------
The Forty-Seventh Chapter

476. O wise son, Abhaya, you are born of such a lineage. Therefore, after performing the twelve types of austerities as instructed by the Jinas, you will attain the state of liberation. 526. Knowing this, Abhaya, filled with joy, bowed to the Jina and entered the city with the king. 527. Then, on another day, King Shrenik was seated in the assembly. He saw Abhaya, the learned and eloquent prince, who was knowledgeable in all scriptures. 528. Desiring to know the greatness of Abhaya, he asked him about the true nature of reality. Abhaya, being a near-liberated soul, understood the true nature of reality and was endowed with clear, sweet, and pleasing speech. 529. Thus, he began to explain, his words illuminating the assembly like the brilliance of his teeth. 530. Those who understand the true nature of the soul and other entities are called Panditas by the wise. Others are merely called Panditas in name. 531. Abhaya said, "The Jinas have spoken of six entities: soul, matter, dharma, adharma, space, and time. These entities are eternal and non-eternal in nature, depending on whether they are considered in terms of their substance or their modes." 532. If we consider the soul and other entities as eternally existing, then the transformations observed in all substances would be impossible. 533. Similarly, if we consider all entities as completely momentary, then there would be no action, no agent, no fruit of action, and all worldly transactions would cease to exist. 534. One might argue that entities are eternally existing in a conventional sense, and therefore worldly transactions would not cease to exist. But this is not correct, because how can the truth of an entity be established through convention? Convention is ultimately false, and it cannot determine the truth of an entity. 535. When we see that the actions of entities are based on both eternal and non-eternal principles, how can someone who considers one of these principles as false claim that the other is true? In reality, both principles are true, as they are both involved in the actions of entities. 536. Those who believe that all entities are characterized by a single principle, their arguments about the origin of doubt and certainty, based on the general and the particular, are invalid. Because if entities are not considered as both general and particular, but only as one, then doubt and certainty cannot arise. 537. The knowledge that entities are characterized by both principles is true.

Page #508:
---------------------------
480
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, those who hold the view of other relationships (like samavaya) besides the relationship of guna-gunya, their view is refuted because it leads to the denial of the established principle that there is no substance without a relationship. 539
Abandoning the pride of false views, one should accept the truth as declared by the omniscient, that all substances are eternal and non-eternal. 540
Faith in the omniscient and his teachings is called right faith (samyak darshan), knowledge of the things declared by the omniscient is called right knowledge (samyak jnana), and restraint of the three yogas (karma, ajiva, and dharma) according to the teachings of the omniscient is called right conduct (samyak charitra). 541
These three together are considered the cause of liberation for the aspiring soul. 542
Right conduct is accompanied by right faith and right knowledge, but right faith and right knowledge are present in the fourth stage of spiritual progress even without right conduct. 543
Therefore, the aspiring soul with right faith should achieve the supreme state of liberation by practicing the highest restraint and purification of all karmas. 544
Hearing this captivating explanation of Abhayakumar, all those assembled in the assembly praised him, saying, "Abhayakumar is a very skilled and learned teacher of the true nature of reality." Thus, everyone praised his greatness, and rightly so, for who are those without envy who do not praise the virtues of the virtuous? 545-546
This wise man's intellect was sharp from birth, and it became even sharper and unique through the influence of scriptures.

Page #509:
---------------------------
The 74th chapter, then, that fearless, learned Abhayakumar, skilled in the art of speech, having obtained the banner of victory among those adept in many methods, delighted the entire assembly with his eloquence. || 547 ||

The Malini meter:  Behold, how far apart is the Shravaka, well-versed in true principles, and the ignorant Brahmin, deeply rooted in the foolishness that has grown far and wide due to the rising of evil deeds! Yet, through his teachings, this glorious Abhayakumar attained the divine state.  Indeed, what does the company of the virtuous not accomplish?  It accomplishes everything. || 548 ||

The Shārdūlavikrīḍita meter:  The wise person whose intellect is engaged in the contemplation of truth, and whose faith is unwavering in that intellect, by means of that intellect, abandons what is to be abandoned and embraces what is to be embraced.  He cuts off the bonds of false beliefs and the like, continuously diminishes the countless karmas that reside in existence, and thus, reaching the end of the cycle of existence, becomes like Abhayakumar, a dwelling place of the bliss of liberation. || 549 ||

Thus ends the 74th chapter, named "The Narrative of the Deeds of Kumar," in the collection of the Trishatikalaksana Mahapuraana, composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya, renowned as Bhashanami, which narrates the life stories of the last Tirthankara, Vardhamana Swami, King Shrenika, and Abhayakumar. 

1.  Obtained through teachings. Jain Education Internal.

Page #510:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

On another day, the illustrious Ganadhara Gautama, the possessor of radiant brilliance, was seated on Vipulachala. The king Shrenik, approaching him, inquired about the birth story of Chandana Aryika, the mistress of all Aryikas. The Ganadhara, possessing many great powers, replied as follows:

In the country of Sindhu, in the city of Vaishali, there lived a king named Chetak, renowned for his humility and devotion to the Jinas. His queen was named Subhadra. They had ten sons: Dhanadatta, Dhanabhadra, Upendra, Sudatta, Singhabhadra, Mukumbhoja, Akampan, Patangaka, Prabhanjan, and Prabhas. They were all known for their excellent qualities, resembling the ten virtues like forbearance.

Besides these sons, they had seven daughters, each resembling one of the seven Riddhis. The eldest was Priyakarini, followed by Mrigawati, then Su-prabha, then Prabhavati, then Chelini, then Jyeshta, and the youngest was Chandana. In the country of Videha, in the city of Kundanagara, there reigned a king named Siddhartha, the crown jewel of the Nath lineage, possessing all three Siddhis. Due to the influence of his good deeds, Priyakarini became his wife.

In the country of Vatsa, in the city of Kaushambi, resided Shatanik, a king of the Chandra lineage. Mrigawati, the second daughter, became his wife. In the country of Dasharna, in the city of Hemakachcha, ruled king Dasharath, a king resembling the moon in the sky of the Surya lineage. Su-prabha, the third daughter, became his queen, resembling the pure brilliance of the sun. In the country of Kachcha, in the city of Raruka, ruled a great king named Udayan. Prabhavati, the fourth daughter, became his beloved. Due to her perfect adherence to good conduct, she was also known as Sheelavati.

In the country of Gandhara, in the city of Mahipura, resided king Satyaka. He requested the hand of Chetak's eldest daughter, Jyeshta, but the king refused. Enraged by this, the foolish Satyaka, driven by pride, engaged in battle. However, he was defeated and, ashamed of his defeat, he quickly went to the sage Damvara and sought refuge.

Page #511:
---------------------------
Chapter Fifty-Seven
483. King Chetak had a beautiful painting made of his seven daughters on a cloth, to keep them always in his sight. ||15|| Seeing a small dot on the thigh of the painting of his daughter Chelini, the king was very angry with the painter. ||16|| The painter humbly replied, "O revered one, while painting, a dot fell here. I tried to remove it two or three times, but it kept reappearing. So, I thought that this mark must be there. Therefore, I did not remove it again." Hearing the painter's words, the king was pleased. ||17-18|| King Chetak used to worship the image of the Jina, keeping the painting of his daughters spread near it, during his daily worship. ||19|| Once, King Chetak went to the city of Rajagriha in Magadha with his army. He camped outside the city in the royal garden. After taking a bath, he first worshipped the image of the Jina and then the painting kept nearby. Seeing this, you asked the people standing nearby, "What is this?" They replied, "O King, these are the paintings of the king's seven daughters. Four of them are married, but he has not given away the other three. Two of these three are of marriageable age, and the youngest is still a child." ||20-23|| Hearing their words, you told your ministers, "My heart is drawn to these two daughters. The ministers also went to Abhayakumar and said, "Your father, King Chetak, is attracted to his two daughters. He has asked for them, but he is not giving them away because of their age." ||24-25|| "This work must be done. Tell me some way to do it." Hearing the ministers' words, Abhayakumar, who was clever in finding solutions to problems, said, "You all be quiet. I will accomplish this task." Thus, he satisfied the ministers and sent them away. He himself made a beautiful painting of King Shrenik on a cloth. He covered it with a cloth and took it with great care. He bribed the people near the king and brought them under his control. He himself, disguised as a merchant named Vodrak, entered King Chetak's house. ||26-28||

Page #512:
---------------------------
English translation preserving Jain terms:

484
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana, a merchant named Vodraka entered the temple. Seeing the image of a maiden there, he became enamored with it. 21 Out of great audacity, he went on the path created by the young man and reached a certain place. 30 The elder sister, Celini, who was cunning, left her own ornaments and went, forgetting them. She herself accompanied him. 3 She also, coming for the ornaments, was extremely distressed seeing that. Lamenting "This is me," she went to her aunt Yashasvati. 32 Hearing the Jain doctrine from the nearby kingdom, she renounced the cycle of rebirth and attained the destroyer of sins. 33 You also, out of great affection, accepted Celini as per the rites and made her the Mahadevi, so she was very pleased. 34 Chandana herself, in the presence of the Gani Yashasvati, attained right faith and the vows of the Shravaka, and became happy. 35 Then, Manovega, the lord of the golden city on the southern range of the mountain, along with his wife Manovega, roamed freely in the Ashoka forest. 36 Seeing the unclothed Chandana playing with her companions, he, whose limbs were tormented by the arrows of Cupid, brought his beloved to his house through the power of his magic. 39 On returning, Manovega heard the words spoken by the angry and red-eyed Manovega. 40 Knowing the magical power, she carefully stepped on the left foot of that goddess of magic, due to which the magic fled from the throne. 41 Knowing the activities of the Alokini Vidya, she saw her husband going on the wrong path and said, "If you desire, she will curse you." 42 Terrified of the Bhutaramana in the forest, he abandoned that wife.

Page #513:
---------------------------
Pañcasaptatitama Parva

At the southern bank of the Airāvatī river, Pārṇalavyā, filled with sorrow, abandoned Candanā there with the help of a Siddha-vidyā. ॥44॥ She, being engrossed in the recitation of the Pañcanamaskāra mantra, spent that night in great distress. At the rise of the sun, by chance, a forest-dweller named Kālakālya came there. He gave her his own valuable and shining ornaments and also preached the Dharma to her, due to which the forest-dweller became very pleased. ॥45-47॥ That forest-dweller was the king of the Bhīls, known as Siṃha, who lived at the foot of the Bhīmakūṭa mountain. He handed over Candanā to the lord of the fearsome village called Bhayaṃkarā. That wicked one, being deluded by desire, wanted to subdue her. ॥48॥ Seeing this, his mother warned him, "O son, do not do this, as she is a manifest deity. If she gets angry, she will cause great torment, penance, and sorrow." Fearing his mother's words, even the wicked one released Candanā. ॥49-50॥ There, Candanā lived peacefully for some time under the care of the mother of that Bhīl. ॥51॥

Then, in the excellent city of Kauśāmbī, there lived a merchant named Vṛṣabhasena. His employee, named Mitravīra, was a friend of the king of the Bhīls. The king of the Bhīls gave Candanā to this Mitravīra, and he, with great devotion, handed her over to the merchant, his master. ॥52-53॥ Once, while Candanā was serving water to the merchant, her unbound hair fell down and was hanging on the ground, wet with water. Seeing this, the merchant's wife, named Bhadrā, became suspicious, thinking that her husband had a connection with Candanā. Enraged, with trembling lips, the wicked woman bound Candanā with chains and constantly tormented her with poor food and beatings. ॥54-57॥ But Candanā thought, "This is the result of my own sinful actions. What can this wretched woman do?" Bearing it all patiently, she continued to endure. ॥58॥

Page #514:
---------------------------
456
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
She continued to self-deprecate. She did not even inform her elder sister, Mrigaavati, of all this. 59

On another day, the Veer (Mahavira Swami) entered that very city for food. Seeing him, Chandana went forward with great devotion. As she approached, her chains fell off, and her body, adorned with ornaments, became beautiful. As if burdened by the ornaments, she bowed and touched the earth with her head, prostrated herself, and welcomed him according to the proper procedure. 61

Having fed him, the Maanini (Chandana) was honored by the Amars (Devas). The earth rained flowers, the sound of celestial drums echoed, and the praise of the gift was sung. Indeed, excellent punya (merit) bears its abundant fruit immediately. 62-63

Hearing this news, Mrigaavati, Chandana's elder sister, came to her with her son, Udayan. Knowing this, she embraced Chandana with affection and asked her about the past. Hearing the whole story, she became very distressed. Then, Queen Mrigaavati took her home and comforted her. Seeing this, the Sethani, Bhadra, and the Seth, Vrishbhasena, were both frightened and took refuge at the feet of Mrigaavati. The compassionate Queen made them both bow to the lotus feet of Chandana. 64-66

Chandana forgave them, and they were very happy. They said, "This is as if embodied forgiveness itself." Hearing this news, Chandana's relatives also came to her. Everyone in that city went to pay homage to Mahavira Swami. Chandana also went there. There, she developed detachment and renounced her relatives, taking initiation. Through the greatness of tapascharya and samyaggyaan, she attained the position of a Ganini at that very moment. 67-68

Hearing this story of Chandana's present life, King Chetak asked again, "What did Chandana do in her previous birth to come here?" In response, Ganadhar Bhagwan said, "In this very Magadh country, there is a large city called Vatsa. King Prasenjit ruled there. In that city, there lived a Brahmin named Agnimitra. He had two wives, one a Brahmin woman and the other a Vaishya's daughter. The Brahmin woman had a son named Shivabhooti, and the Vaishya daughter had a daughter named Chitra Sena. 69-72

Page #515:
---------------------------
The Seventy-third Verse:
Shivabhuti's wife was named Somila, who was the daughter of the Brahmin Somasharma. And in the same city, there was a Brahmin son named Devasharma, whom Chitrasena had married.

The Seventy-fourth Verse:
When Agnibhuti the Brahmin passed away, his son Shivabhuti became the successor. Chitrasena also became a widow, and she along with her sons started living with Shivabhuti, as the ways of karma are indeed mysterious.

The Seventy-fifth Verse:
Shivabhuti's crooked ways were adopted by the god (Shivabhuti). Somila took care of Chitrasena and her sons.

The Seventy-sixth Verse:
Unable to tolerate the sinful Somila, she was rebuked by Shivabhuti. Enraged, she falsely accused that Chitrasena was living with her husband.

The Seventy-seventh Verse:
Chitrasena also, in her anger, made a false accusation against Somila. She said, "I will punish her after my death."

The Seventy-eighth Verse:
Earlier, Somila had invited the Jain ascetic Shivaguptaswami for a meal, due to which Shivabhuti became very angry with her. But Somila pacified him by narrating the greatness of the ascetic.

The Seventy-ninth and Eightieth Verses:
Shivabhuti was then pleased, and he approved of Somila's donation. After some time, Shivabhuti passed away and was reborn in the beautiful city of Kantapura, as the mighty son of King Suvarnavarmana and Queen Vidyullekhā.

The Eighty-first and Eighty-second Verses:
In the region of Anga, in the city of Champā, ruled King Srisheṇa. His queen was named Dhanaśrī, who was the sister of King Suvarnavarmana of Kantapura. Somila, the daughter of Kanakalata, was born to them. Her parents had decided even at her birth that she would be given in marriage to the mighty prince Mahābala.

The Eighty-third to Eighty-sixth Verses:
Mahābala was raised along with the young Kanakalata in Champā. As he grew up and reached youth, as per the advice of his maternal uncle, he started living separately from her, though he remained deeply attached to the girl. Unable to control their passionate desires, they eventually came together.

The Eighty-seventh Verse:
Seeing this, Mahābala's parents, King Suvarnavarmana and Queen Vidyullekhā, were saddened.

Page #516:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that both of them, being of opposite character, were not liked by their parents. They were told, "You cannot stay here, go to another country."  [8]  They left immediately and went to live in the city of Pratyantanagara. [89]  While they were strolling in the garden, they saw a Muni named Muni Gupta, who was seeking alms. [89]  Mahabala and Kanaklata, with devotion, saw him, stood up, circumambulated him, bowed down, and worshipped him according to the rules. [90]  Then, they gave him, with joy, sweet laddoos and other delicious food items prepared for their own use. [91]  By doing so, they accumulated the nine types of merit as instructed by the Jinas. [92]  One day, in the month of Madhu-masa (Chaitra), the young Mahabala was in the forest, where he was bitten by a poisonous snake and died soon after. [93]  Seeing her husband's body, Kanaklata, with her own sword, committed suicide, as if she were following him. [94]  The Acharya says that this is the fate of those who do not attain the ultimate goal. [87-94]

In the Avanti region of this Bharat Kshetra, there is a city called Ujjayini. [95]  Prajapati Maharaj ruled it effortlessly. [95]  In that city, there lived a wealthy merchant named Dhandeva. [96]  His wife was a virtuous lady named Dhanmitra. [96]  Their son was Nagadatta, a man of great strength. [96]  They also had a daughter named Arthswamini, who was Nagadatta's younger sister. [97]  In the city of Palasha, situated in the middle of the Palasha island, King Mahabala ruled. [97]  Kanaklata was the daughter of King Mahabala and his queen, Kanchanalata. [98]  She was a famous daughter named Padmalata. [98]  The wealthy merchant of Ujjayini, Dhandeva, married another woman and abandoned his first wife, Dhanmitra. [99]  She, along with her son, went to another country. [99]  One day, she attained knowledge and took the vows of a Shravaka from the Guru, Shildatta. [99]  She entrusted her son to the Muni for the study of scriptures. [100]  In due course of time, her son, with his intellect as a boat, crossed the ocean of scriptures. [101]  He became a great poet and gained fame by explaining the scriptures. [101]  He, with his beautiful words adorned with various literary devices and his eloquent and pleasing speech, filled the hearts of distinguished people with joy. [102]

Page #517:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

There, he made friendship with Dridhraksha, the son of the Kotpal. He taught the scriptures to the noble people of that city, and thus became an Upadhyaya, earning great wealth. He used this wealth to support his mother, sister, and himself. 

He married his younger sister to Kulavanij, the son of his maternal uncle, who lived in the village of Nandi, with great respect. 

One day, after reciting many verses, he had an audience with the king. The king was pleased and showered him with great honor, wealth, and joy. 

One day, after asking his mother, he went to his father and bowed down at his feet. Seeing him, Dhandeva said, "My son, live long! Sit here." He comforted him with such loving words. Then, Nagadatta asked for his share of jewels and other valuables. 

His father replied, "My son, all my possessions are in the city of Palasha, situated in the middle of the Palasha island. Go and take them." 

Hearing this, he set out with his brothers, Nakula and Sahadeva, who were his co-heirs, on a boat and sailed into the sea. While sailing, he expressed his desire that if his wishes were fulfilled, he would return and worship the Jineshwara. With this aspiration, he repeatedly praised the Jina and bowed to his father before departing. 

He quickly reached the city of Palashapur. He anchored his boat there and saw that the city was devoid of human activity. He wondered why the city was like this. Then, he threw a long rope and, with its help, entered the city. 

Upon entering the city, he saw a young woman sitting alone. He asked her why the city was in such a state and who she was. In response, the young woman respectfully said, "Previously, the owner of this city had a co-heir who was very angry. He had mastered the art of Rakshasa Vidya and thus acquired the name 'Rakshasa'. In his anger, he destroyed the city and its king completely. Later, a man from his lineage, who had mastered a magical sword, protected the city and restored it."

Page #518:
---------------------------
46.
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the king Mahabala had a wife named Kachchhalata. I was their daughter, named Padmalata. ||18|| My father never left his mantra-infused sword, but once, due to carelessness, he left it behind. Seeing the opportunity, a Rakshasa killed him, leaving the city desolate. He considered me his own daughter, so he took me with him, intending to kill me. He promised to return to take me. Hearing this, a Vaishya took the sword and hid in the city gate. When he saw the Vidhyadhara, he killed him. The Vidhyadhara, chanting the Panchanamaskaar mantra, fell to the earth with a steady mind. ||19-22|| Hearing the Panchanamaskaar mantra, Nagadatta thought, "Alas, I have done all this sin in vain!" He threw away his sword and asked the wounded Vidhyadhara, "What is your Dharma?" The Vidhyadhara replied, "I am also the son of a Shravaka. I did this out of anger." ||123-124|| See, anger turns a friend into an enemy, anger destroys Dharma, anger corrupts the kingdom, and anger even takes away life. Anger makes even a mother angry, and anger leads to downfall. Therefore, those who desire well-being should abandon anger forever, as the Jina has said. I know I was overpowered by anger, and I have already received its fruit. What to say about the afterlife? ||125-126|| Thus, blaming himself, the Vidhyadhara asked Nagadatta, "Where did you come from?" The Vaishya replied, "I am a guest. Seeing this girl distressed by grief, I acted bravely to protect her from your fear." ||127-128|| You are a Dharma-bhakt. Without knowing, I did this deed. I have abandoned the essence of Jainendra's teachings, the love for all beings. ||130|| O Bhavy, forgive me for this transgression, for I have violated the rules of the Jain Shaasana. Understanding all this, the Vidhyadhara said, 
-
-
-
1. Mahabalopyaasya iti kachit. 2. Taamai tayoraham iti kachit. 3. Prishtemaa na. 4. Daasyaamo-l. 5. Dharmabhaktvam te.

Page #519:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

I

Sri Nagadatta, having contemplated the *Bhavayajna* mantra, then took the *Padmalata* maiden and the wealth accumulated by his father.  || 133 ||

His brothers, Nakula and Sahadeva, with the rope used for pulling, pulled the *Padmalata* maiden and the wealth onto the ship. || 134 ||

With wicked intentions, they did not give the rope to Nagadatta and went to their own city.  It is only natural for heirs to take advantage of any opportunity. || 135 ||

Seeing them, Nagadatta also went with his younger brothers.  The king and the people, with suspicion, asked, "Where is Nagadatta?" || 136 ||

They replied, "He went with us, but then he went somewhere else. We don't know where he is."  Thus, they concealed the fact that Nagadatta had left them. || 137 ||

Sri Nagadatta's mother, with a troubled mind, went to the *Shiladara* Guru and asked about her son. || 138 ||

Seeing her distress, the Muni, with a compassionate heart, reassured her, "Don't worry, your son will return soon without any obstacles." || 139 ||

The Muni, with the eyes of knowledge, gave her this assurance.  Meanwhile, Nagadatta, seeing a Jain temple, circumambulated it and thought, "I will sit here."  He entered the temple, performed the prescribed *stotra*, and sat there lost in thought. || 140 ||

At that time, a Jain *Vidhyadhara*, knowing Nagadatta's true nature, saw him and, taking him with his wealth, brought him to the middle of the island, to a beautiful forest called *Manohara*. || 142 ||

He settled Nagadatta there comfortably and, with great respect, asked him about his well-being.  Then, he went to his desired place.  This is the nature of the devotion to Dharma of the virtuous. || 143 ||

Near that *Manohara* forest, in the village of *Nandigrama*, Nagadatta's younger sister lived.  He went there, deposited his wealth with her, and stayed there comfortably. || 144 ||

Later, his sister's father-in-law and others, with great affection, came to Nagadatta and said, "O Kumar! The merchant wants to take the newly arrived maiden for his son, Nakula.  He has called all of us.  But we are poor and cannot go there empty-handed.  How can we go there and be accepted?"  They were very worried. || 145 ||

Nagadatta said, "We have all become poor today."  Hearing this, he took out some precious jewels from his treasure trove and said, "This is the result of my past karma.  It is a special manifestation of my past deeds."  Thus, Nagadatta, by contemplating the *Pancha-Nama-Skara* mantra, attained the *Vidhyadhara* heaven. || 146 ||

Page #520:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, after giving them various gifts, I have come to you. Give this jeweled ring to the girl. || 148 ||

Having said this, he himself, along with the virtuous teacher, bowed to the son of the protector, having seen his own friend. || 149 ||

Having narrated the whole story from the beginning, he went with him. He saw the king with great affection, with precious jewels. || 150 ||

"Oh Nagadatta, where have you come from? Where did you go?" The king, pleased, asked. || 151 ||

He narrated everything from the beginning, including his request for a share and his journey. Hearing this, the king was enraged and prepared to punish the Seth, but Nagadatta, pleading with him, said that it was not right. || 152 ||

Giving him the position of Seth, along with a lot of wealth, he also gave him the girl Padmalata in marriage according to the rituals. Then, in his court, the king clearly said: || 153 ||

"See the greatness of punya! This Nagadatta, having escaped from many obstacles like Rakshasas, and having subdued the best jewels, has come here happily." || 154 ||

"Water becomes nectar by punya, poison also becomes nectar by punya, enemies become friends by punya, all kinds of fears are pacified by punya, the poor become rich by punya, and heaven is also attained by punya. Therefore, those who desire wealth without any obstacles should perform all actions according to the Dharma Shastra spoken by Shri Jinendradev and bind punya!" || 155 ||

All the people in the court accepted this advice of the king in their hearts. || 156 ||

Then, the Seth, filled with remorse, bowed down with his sons and wife, saying, "Oh Kumar, forgive me!" But Nagadatta did not let him do so. He lifted him up and comforted him with kind words. Then, the wise man performed the worship of Jinendra Bhagavan, as he had promised earlier. || 157 ||

Thus, all of them accepted the excellent Dharma of the Shravakas. Their hearts were filled with mutual friendship, through giving, worship, and other actions. || 158 ||

Page #521:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fifty-Seven

**463**

At the end of his life, Nagadatta embraced the path of renunciation and became a great deity in the Saudharma heaven. (162) After enjoying the supreme pleasures of heaven, he was born again in this Bharat Kshetra, on the Vijay mountain, in the city of Shivkar, as the son of Suvega, the queen of Pavanvega, the king of the Vidyadharas. (163) Due to the overwhelming affection of his previous birth, he was compelled to abduct Chandana. This is understandable, as excessive love often leads to folly. (165) He is destined to attain liberation in this very life, by embracing the Digambar form. (166)

Nagadatta's younger sister, Arthswamini, descended from heaven and became Manovega, the one who wears the great radiance. (167) The Vidyadhara who was killed by Nagadatta in the city of Palashnagar, was reborn as King Chetak of the Soma dynasty, having descended from heaven. (168) Nagadatta's mother, Dhanamitra, ascended to heaven and was reborn as your beloved queen, Subhadra. (169) Nagadatta's wife, Padmalata, performed many austerities and ascended to heaven. She was reborn as your daughter, Chandana. (170)

Nakula, wandering through the cycle of births and deaths, became a hunter named Simha. He tormented Chandana due to the love and hatred of his previous birth. (171) Sahadeva, after a long journey through the cycle of births and deaths, was reborn as a wise Vaishya named Mitravira in the city of Kaushambi. He served Vrishabhasena and presented Chandana to him. Nagadatta's father, Dhandeva, a wealthy merchant, attained peace and ascended to heaven. He was reborn as the virtuous Vrishabhasena, a wealthy merchant in Kaushambi. (172-174)

Chitrasena, who harbored hatred for Somila, wandered through the cycle of births and deaths for a long time. After finding some peace, she was reborn as a Vaishya daughter in Kaushambi. She became known as Bhadra and married Vrishabhasena. Due to the animosity she had cultivated in her previous life, she tormented Chandana. (175-176)

This Chandana will ascend to the Achyuta heaven and return from there. With the rise of auspicious deeds, she will attain the second Veda and achieve liberation. (177)

**Note:** The text mentions "Somila" but it is unclear who this is. It is likely a typo or a name that is not explained in the context.

Page #522:
---------------------------
464
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana states that due to the five types of wrong views, etc., as mentioned in the Bandha Vidhana, beings obtain transformations in their substance, space, etc., through accumulated karma. || 178 || These five types of transformations are the most dreadful sufferings in the world. It is unfortunate that these beings, continuously experiencing these five types of sufferings, fall into the mouth of Yama. || 179 || These very beings, having obtained the means of time, etc., obtain the supreme means of liberation, which is the unsurpassed form of right faith, right knowledge, right conduct, and right penance. || 180 || Having performed virtuous actions, they attain supreme sovereignty in the seven supreme realms and become recipients of infinite happiness. || 181 || Thus, that entire assembly became immortal like the gods, due to the auspiciousness of the sound-like elixir emanating from the Lord Gautam. || 182 || 
Then, on another day, King Shrenik, with great love, was wandering through the four luminous forests outside the Gandhakuti. There, beneath an Ashoka tree, the Muni Jiwandhar was seated in meditation. King Shrenik, seeing him, became attached to his form, etc., and with curiosity, went inside. He worshipped the great Ganadhardev with great devotion and, sitting in the appropriate place, folded his hands and asked him with great humility, "O Bhagavan! Who is this Muni, who seems to be liberated from all karma today?" || 183-186 || 
In response, Sudharmacharaya, the holder of four knowledges, said, "It is right, for there is no sorrow in the hearts of both the speaker and the listener of the character of the virtuous." || 187 || He said, "O Shrenik! Listen, on this earth adorned with the Jambu tree, there is a country called Hemaangad, and in it, there is a beautiful city called Rajpur. In it, there was a king named Satyandhar, who delighted everyone like the moon, and his queen was Vijaya, like another Vijayalakshmi." || 188-189 || 
That king had a minister named Kashtangarik, who was skilled in all matters, and a priest named Rudradatt, who destroyed calamities caused by fate. || 190 || One day, Queen Vijaya was resting comfortably in her inner chamber. There, she saw two dreams in the latter part of the night with great joy. The first dream she saw was that... 
And so on... || 177 || 
These beings obtain transformations in their substance, space, etc., through accumulated karma due to the five types of wrong views, etc., as mentioned in the Bandha Vidhana. || 178 || These five types of transformations are the most dreadful sufferings in the world. It is unfortunate that these beings, continuously experiencing these five types of sufferings, fall into the mouth of Yama. || 179 || These very beings, having obtained the means of time, etc., obtain the supreme means of liberation, which is the unsurpassed form of right faith, right knowledge, right conduct, and right penance. || 180 || Having performed virtuous actions, they attain supreme sovereignty in the seven supreme realms and become recipients of infinite happiness. || 181 || Thus, that entire assembly became immortal like the gods, due to the auspiciousness of the sound-like elixir emanating from the Lord Gautam. || 182 || 
Then, on another day, King Shrenik, with great love, was wandering through the four luminous forests outside the Gandhakuti. There, beneath an Ashoka tree, the Muni Jiwandhar was seated in meditation. King Shrenik, seeing him, became attached to his form, etc., and with curiosity, went inside. He worshipped the great Ganadhardev with great devotion and, sitting in the appropriate place, folded his hands and asked him with great humility, "O Bhagavan! Who is this Muni, who seems to be liberated from all karma today?" || 183-186 || 
In response, Sudharmacharaya, the holder of four knowledges, said, "It is right, for there is no sorrow in the hearts of both the speaker and the listener of the character of the virtuous." || 187 || He said, "O Shrenik! Listen, on this earth adorned with the Jambu tree, there is a country called Hemaangad, and in it, there is a beautiful city called Rajpur. In it, there was a king named Satyandhar, who delighted everyone like the moon, and his queen was Vijaya, like another Vijayalakshmi." || 188-189 || 
That king had a minister named Kashtangarik, who was skilled in all matters, and a priest named Rudradatt, who destroyed calamities caused by fate. || 190 || One day, Queen Vijaya was resting comfortably in her inner chamber. There, she saw two dreams in the latter part of the night with great joy. The first dream she saw was that... 
And so on... || 177 ||

Page #523:
---------------------------
## Chapter Seventy-Seven

**465** In the third watch of the night, the queen, having dreamt a dream, went to the king. Seeing her, he asked her about the fruit of her dream. **15** Examining her with a compassionate heart, he said, "You will soon have a son who will obtain eight benefits and in the end, become the lord of the earth." **19** Hearing this, the queen's mind was filled with both joy and sorrow. **195** Seeing her distress, the king comforted her with kind words. Thus, both of them spent their time happily. **196** Then, a soul from the celestial realm, having fallen from heaven, was born in the queen's womb and lived happily, just like a royal swan in a lotus pond during the autumn season. **197** 

**198** On another day, a wealthy merchant named Gandhotkat, residing in the same city, went to the beautiful garden called Manohara and saw the Muni Raja, Sheelgupta, who possessed the three kinds of knowledge. With humility, he bowed to him and asked, "O Lord! Due to the influence of evil karma, I have had many short-lived sons. Will I ever have a long-lived son?" **199** 

**200** The compassionate Muni Raja replied, "Yes, you will also have a long-lived son." **201** "O, great merchant! This is the sign of having a long-lived son. Listen carefully, and so will the son you will receive. You will have a dead son, and to abandon him, you will go to the forest. There, you will find a virtuous son. He will enjoy all the earth, be satisfied with worldly pleasures, and in the end, destroy all his karma and attain the wealth of liberation." **202** 

**203** When the Muni Raja was speaking these words to Gandhotkat, a bird was also present there. Hearing the Muni Raja's words, the bird's mind was filled with the desire to help the future king's mother. **204** When the time came for the king's birth, the bird, inspired by his merit, went to the royal palace and took the form of a Garuda vehicle. **205** This is indeed true, for often, due to the influence of past good deeds, even deities come close. **206** 

**1**

Page #524:
---------------------------
466
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, the king, seeing the queen without ornaments, asked her respectfully, "Where is the king?" || 208 || She replied, "The king is asleep, he cannot be seen now." || 209 || Considering this as an ill omen, he left and reached the house of the Kaṣṭhāṅgārika minister at sunrise. Seeing him there, he said in private, "This kingdom will be yours, you should kill the king." || 210-211 || Hearing this, the Kaṣṭhāṅgārika said, "I am the king's servant, he appointed me as minister. Even though he is ungrateful and does not appreciate my service, how can I do this wrong?" || 212 || "O Rudradatt, you are wise, why did you say this injustice?" Saying this, he covered his ears in fear. || 213 || Hearing this, the Purohita said, "The son of this king will be your killer, therefore, retaliate." || 214 || Saying this, Rudradatt quickly went home and died on the third day due to the effect of this sin, and went to hell, which gives long-lasting suffering. || 215 || On the other hand, the Kaṣṭhāṅgārika minister, with evil intentions, fearing death due to Rudradatt's words, desired to kill the king. He had gathered two thousand brave warriors by giving them money. He was moving towards the royal palace with them, along with prepared elephants and horses for war. When the king came to know about this, he quickly sent the queen away from there on a Garuda Yantra. || 216-218 || When the kings who had been subdued by the Kaṣṭhāṅgārika minister saw the king Satyandhar, they left the minister and became loyal to the king. The king, with all those kings, attacked the minister in anger and quickly defeated him in battle, putting him on the path of fear. || 219-220 || When Kalāṅgārika, the son of Kaṣṭhāṅgārika, heard the news of his father's defeat in battle, he became very angry and arrived suddenly with a large army ready for war. The sinful Kaṣṭhāṅgārika also joined him. Finally, he...

Page #525:
---------------------------
The fifty-seventh chapter, a chapter full of sorrow, is a chapter of deceit, a chapter of violence, a chapter of dharma, a chapter of sorrow, a chapter of kingdom, a chapter of sorrow. The minister is the lowest. || 223 || Therefore, Vijayadevi, mounting the Garuda vehicle, her body burning with the fire of sorrow, weeping, protected by the Yakshis. || 224 || With her face covered in blood, her throat pierced by arrows, her body trembling with pain, her face contorted, she went to the cremation ground, where thieves were making various sounds, and Dakinis were dragging half-burnt corpses from the fire and eating them in pieces with sharp knives. The cremation ground was filled with Dakinis on all sides. || 225-227 || In that cremation ground, the Yakshi protected her all night, so that she did not suffer even a little. Just as the sky receives the moon, so did the queen receive a beautiful son that very night. || 228 || At that time, Vijayadevi did not have even a little celebration of the birth of her son, but instead, sorrow increased due to the adversity of fate. The Yakshi quickly placed jeweled lamps all around and, seeing the queen, who was like a cloth scorched by fire, gave her the following advice. She said, "In this world, all places are filled with sorrow, the beauty of youth is perishable, the gathering of brothers and sisters is destined to be destroyed, life is as fickle as a lamp, this body is filled with all kinds of impurities, therefore, it is to be rejected by the wise, it is to be abandoned. This kingdom, which is worshipped by the whole world, is like the flash of lightning. All beings find joy in the permutations of all things, but those permutations are sure to be destroyed, therefore, the joy that is found in them is ultimately painful. Even in the presence of an undesirable object, there is no joy, and even in the presence of a desirable object, there is no claim to it, and when there is joy in oneself, there is a loss of the three: the object, the desirability, and the claim. Those whose knowledge sees all things at once, without any order, have not seen that any object is permanent. If there is love for existing and future things, then it is good, but who is the wise person who also loves things that have been destroyed? || 236 ||
Thus, reflecting on the nature of the world, Vijayadevi, my dear, do not be attached to the past, and do not waste your love on things that are gone. || 237 ||

Page #526:
---------------------------
The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana
This son, who has been born, will continue to prosper until he attains liberation. He will destroy the wicked enemy and bring you joy. || 238 ||
Soothe your mind, practice meditation, and eat wholesome food. Why waste yourself with sorrow, which destroys the body? || 239 ||
Even in another life, your husband cannot be obtained through sorrow. The paths of beings are different due to their different karmas. || 240 ||
With these words of wisdom, the Yakshi consoled Vijaya Rani, freeing her from sorrow. Not only that, she stayed by her side all night, for such is the friendship of the virtuous. || 241 ||
Meanwhile, Gandhotkat, the merchant, arrived at the cremation ground to collect the body of his deceased son. As he was leaving with the body, he heard the deep voice of a child. Upon hearing the voice, he uttered the words "Jeev Jeev," as if he were pronouncing the name "Jivandhar," the name of his son who would later become famous. Knowing that the words of the Muni were true, Gandhotkat was very pleased. He spread out his arms and lovingly lifted the child. Vijaya Devi recognized Gandhotkat by his voice. She introduced herself and said to him, "O noble one, raise my son in such a way that no one knows his true identity." With these words, she entrusted her son to Gandhotkat. || 242-245 ||
Gandhotkat, the merchant, accepted the child, saying, "I will do so." He quickly returned home and gave the child to his wife, Nand. While giving the child, he did not mention anything about the incident, but he said angrily, "You foolish woman! The driver was alive, and you left him at the cremation ground without even examining him. Take this child, he is long-lived and virtuous." With these words, he gave the child to his wife. || 246-247 ||
Sunda, the merchant's wife, was pleased and took the child in her arms. The child, shining like the morning sun, was a sight to behold, and Sunda's eyes were filled with love as she gazed at him. || 248-249 ||
One day, the merchant performed many auspicious rituals and, after the Annaprashan ceremony, named his son "Jivandhar." || 250 ||
Then, Vijaya Rani, riding on the same Garuda-mantra, went to the great hermitage of the ascetics in the middle of the Dandaka forest. || 251 ||
There, she lived in sorrow. A Yakshi approached her and, out of compassion, wished to alleviate her sorrow. || 252 ||

Page #527:
---------------------------
The fifty-seventh chapter, filled with stories befitting the righteous, describes the state of existence. It depicts the path of Dharma, which is constantly being practiced. || 25 ||

From here, the younger of the two queens of King Satyanadhar, Bhamarati and Anangapataaka, were both beautiful. || 254 ||

They both obtained two sons, Madhur and Vakul. Knowing the nature of Dharma, both queens embraced the vows of a Shravaka. || 255 ||

They were both nurtured by Gandhotkat, and they grew up. In the same city, four more Shravakas were born: Vijayati, Sagar, Dhanapal, and Matisagar. || 256 ||

They were, in order, the king's commander, priest, merchant, and minister. || 257 ||

Their wives, in order, were Jayavati, Shrimati, Shridatta, and Anupama. From them, in order, were born the sons: Devsen, Buddhishe, Varadatt, and Madhumukh. || 258 ||

These six sons, starting with Madhur, grew up alongside the Kumar, Jiwandhar, always eager to engage in childish play. Just as the six substances, Jeeva, etc., never leave the space of the universe, so too, these six sons never left the side of the noble Kumar, Jiwandhar. || 259 ||

They stayed with him night and day, as dear as their own lives. After that, Gandhotkat's wife, Sunanda, also gave birth to a son named Nandany. || 260 ||

One day, Kumar Jiwandhar was playing games with many children in the outer garden of the city, distributing marbles and engaging in other childish activities. At that moment, a tapasvi came and asked him, "How far is the city from here?" || 261 ||

Hearing the tapasvi's question, Kumar Jiwandhar replied, "You are old, yet you don't even know this? Even a child wouldn't be confused. Seeing children playing in the outer garden, who wouldn't guess that the city is nearby? Just as one can infer the presence of fire from smoke, so too, one can infer the proximity of the city from the sight of children playing in the outer garden." || 262 ||

Smiling, Kumar Jiwandhar said this. Seeing the Kumar's grace, voice, and other qualities, the tapasvi thought, "This child is no ordinary child. His signs reveal that he is born into a royal lineage." || 263 ||

Thinking this, the tapasvi wished to test his lineage through some means. To fulfill his desire, he asked Jiwandhar, "Please give me food." || 264 ||

She arrived at a large ashram and stayed there secretly, without revealing her identity. When Queen Vijayati was overwhelmed with grief, the Yakshi would come and, with the desire to alleviate her sorrow, would tell her stories worthy of listening, stories that would reveal the state of existence and the path of Dharma, thus comforting her heart every day. || 251-253 ||

Page #528:
---------------------------
500
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
The young boy, having promised to feed him, took him along with him. He brought him to his father and said, "I have promised to feed him, now do as you please." 
Hearing this, the father was overjoyed and said, "My son is very humble and praiseworthy." Saying this, he embraced him repeatedly and said, "Son, this ascetic will eat well with me after his bath. You eat without any fear."
After that, Jeevandhar Kumar sat down with his friends to eat. The food was hot, so Jeevandhar Kumar cried and said, "All this food is hot, how can I eat it?" Crying, he harassed his mother. Seeing him cry, the ascetic said, "Bhadra, it is not good for you to cry. Although you are young, you are very intelligent. You have humbled everyone with your strength and other qualities. Why are you crying?"
After the ascetic said this, Jeevandhar Kumar said, "O venerable one, you do not know. Listen, there are these qualities in crying: the first quality is that the accumulated phlegm from a long time is expelled, the second quality is that the eyes become clear, and the third quality is that the food becomes cold. With so many qualities, why do you stop me from crying?"
Hearing his son's words, the mother was very happy and she fed him properly with his friends.
After that, when Gandhotkat had eaten and was sitting comfortably, and the ascetic had also eaten with him, the ascetic said to Gandhotkat, "Seeing this boy's worth, I have become fond of him. Therefore, I will purify his intellect by immersing it in the ocean of scriptures."
Hearing the ascetic's words, Gandhotkat said, "I am the best among the Shravakas - I follow the best vows of a Shravaka, therefore I do not bow down to any other being for any reason, and in the absence of bowing down, your excessive pride will surely be unpleasant for you." Hearing this, the ascetic began to introduce himself in this way:
"I was the king of Singhapur, my name was Aryavarma. Hearing the nature of Dharma from Veeranandi Muni, I adopted pure Samyagdarshan. After that, I gave the kingdom to my son named Dhritiṣeṇa and adopted restraint - I adopted the vows of a Muni. But due to the intense pain of the stomach fire...

Page #529:
---------------------------
The 57th Chapter

501. "He is a true believer, a righteous soul, a virtuous friend." Having carefully examined these words, the chief of the merchants said, "243. I will entrust my son to him. What wise man would not entrust something valuable to a worthy place, like a seed in fertile soil?" 285. Having received the righteous soul, the son, endowed with a vast natural intellect, became a master of all knowledge in a short time. 285. Just as the sun shines brightly in autumn and an elephant adorned with wealth is magnificent, so too did the young prince, having attained his youth, shine with knowledge. 286. In due time, his teacher also attained liberation through self-control. 

Then, at that time, there was a chief of the forest dwellers named Kalakuta, who was like a dark cloud, fearing the rays of the sun, and had taken the form of a human being. He was a hunter of animals and seemed like an obstacle to the righteous. He was a terrible sight, with a bow and arrow in his hand, unseen by anyone, unbearable in battle, bitter like a strong medicine, merciless, and terrifying with the sound of his horns. With such an army, he came to the outskirts of the city, adorned with the forest of Tamaha, with the desire to capture the herd of cows. 287-290. 

Hearing this news, the king, Kaṣṭāṅgārika, announced, "I will give the best daughter, Gāndāvarī, born of Gopeśrī, the wife of Gopeśrī, to the one who rescues the cows." Hearing this announcement, Jīvandhara, the son of Kaṣṭāṅgārika, along with his friends, went to the abode of the Kalakuta Bhil. There, they strung their bows, placed sharp arrows on them, and quickly placed and released arrows due to their special training. They changed all the tactics taught in the Dhanurveda, protected themselves from the rain of arrows of others, moved quickly, cut down the group of enemy arrows, and did not attack the cowardly people, meaning they did not attack the cowardly people with arrows. 291-295. 

Thus, having fought for a long time and defeated the Bhils, who were like a disease of bad conduct, they were embraced by victory and filled all directions with their glorious fame, shining like the moon, the swan, the cotton flower, and the jasmine flower. They entered the city, adorned with fluttering flags. 296-297. 

1:kh.2 The righteous soul accepted him.

Page #530:
---------------------------
502
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, when the Kumar's valor and other qualities were being praised, the eyes of the people were attracted by the fragrance of his fame, like bees to a blooming flower. || 198 || Then, at the Kumar's behest, the Vaisya sons, in unison, declared to the king that it was Nanda who had rescued the cows. || 199 ||  They informed the king and presented the daughter, Godavari, to Nanda, as promised.  The ways of the world are diverse. || 299 || 

Now, in this Bharat Kshetra, on the southern slopes of the Khechara mountain, there is a city called Gaganavallabha, which shines like the radiance of the sky. || 301 || The king of this city, the lord of the Khecharas, was Garudavega.  Due to the pride of his relatives, he was forced to flee to the Ratna Dweep.  There, he established a beautiful city called Ramaaniya on the Manujoday mountain and resided there.  His queen was Dharini. || 302-303 || 

One day, his daughter, Gandharvadatta, observed a fast, which made her body weak.  She worshipped the Jineshwara and, taking the remaining garland, went to her father.  Gandharvadatta was in the bloom of youth.  Seeing her, her father asked his wise minister, Matisagara, "To whom should I give this daughter?"  The minister, a man of vast wisdom, replied, "O King, I once went to Mount Mandara to pay homage to the Jineshwara.  In the eastern part of the Nandana forest, there is a Jain temple.  I circumambulated it with devotion and, after offering prayers according to the rituals, I sat there.  My gaze fell upon the great Charana, Vipulamati, who was seated there.  I bowed to him and listened to his teachings on Dharma.  Then, I asked him, 'O revered one, our king has a daughter named Gandharvadatta.  Who is she destined to be with?'  The Muni, knowing the future, replied, 'In this Bharat Kshetra, in the beautiful land of Hemangada, there is a city called Rajapura.  There, a king named Satyadhara, adorned with the jewel of truth, rules.  His queen is Vijaya, and they have a wise son.  He will be her husband in a Veena Swayamvara.' " || 304-312 ||

Page #531:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

"How can we have a relationship with the Bhu-bhocharas?" The minister asked Matisagar.  || 13 ||

He replied clearly, "There was a wealthy merchant named Vrishabhadatt in that city. His wife was named Padmavati. They had a son named Jinadatt. Once, in the Pritivardhan garden of that city, the Jina Sagar Sena came to worship his Kevala Jnana. Jinadatt went there with his father to worship him. You were also there, and you fell in love with him. Your love was so deep that there was no difference between you except for your physical bodies." || 31, 15, 316, 317 ||

As days passed, Vrishabhadatt left Jinadatt at his place and went to be initiated by the Muni Gunapala, who had attained enlightenment. Padmavati also went to Suvrata and took the vows of a Prajika, maintaining her noble lineage. Jinadatt became the head of his father's wealth and enjoyed life with Manohara and other women. He will come to this Ratna Dweep to earn wealth. || 318, 319, 320, 321 ||

"Our desired goal will be achieved through him." After many days, Jinadatt went to Garuda Vega. Garuda Vega was very pleased and welcomed him. Then, the king of the Gandharvas, Garuda Vega, said to Jinadatt with great respect, "My friend, please arrange a Swayamvara for my daughter Gandharvadatta in your city." Following his command, Jinadatt took Gandharvadatta to the city of Rajapur with many Gandharvas. || 322, 323, 324 ||

There, he announced the Swayamvara in the beautiful forest of Manohara and built a magnificent Swayamvara house. || 325 ||

When many skilled Gandharvas and Bhu-bhocharas princes arrived, he performed the worship of the Jina. || 326 ||

1. Manoramadi-lo. 2. Samudhuhya lo. 3. Kala-vidya-vidagdha-eshhu na. 4. Sukumare-shu yate-shu lo, ga, ma.

Page #532:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana,
Then Gandharvadatta herself entered the assembly hall of the Swayamvara. Taking the Veena named Sugosha, which had excellent qualities, || 327 ||
She played it with a combination of pure and native swaras, and thus humbled all the kings. || 328 ||
504
* Jivanadhara, desiring to dispel the pride born from her skill in the Veena, arrived at the assembly hall of the Swayamvara. || 329 ||
He appointed wise men, who were impartial, skilled in the art of the Veena, and acceptable to both sides, to examine the Veenas for their merits and demerits. || 330 ||
He instructed the appointed men, "Let a flawless Veena be given." The appointed men presented him with three or four Veenas. || 331 ||
But Jivanadhara, seeing the flaws of hair, fur, and dust in them, rejected them all and said to the maiden Gandharvadatta, "If you are free from envy, then give your Veena." || 332 ||
Gandharvadatta, with great respect, placed her Veena in his hands. The Kumar, taking the Veena, sang. His song followed the path of the scriptures, was a combination of song and music, had a deep tone, was pleasing, sweet, and capable of causing confusion in the minds of deer. It was adorned with the praise of the learned, like the offering of excellent flowers. || 333-335 ||
Hearing his song, Gandharvadatta was moved by the arrows of Kamadeva in her heart. Therefore, she adorned him with a garland. What does not happen in the presence of virtue? That is, everything happens. || 336 ||
At that time, some people became dull like lamps lit in the daytime, while others shone brightly like lamps lit at night. Meaning - Those who were envious became dull-faced upon seeing Jivanadhara's skill, while those who were appreciative of merit had their faces brightened. || 337 ||
Gandharvadatta, having obtained Jivanadhara through the Veena named Sugosha, was satisfied and said to herself, "O Sugosha! You are worthy of my lineage, sweet, and captivating. You have been the cause of obtaining the Kumar's company, like a clever messenger." || 338-339 ||
At that time, Kalangarik, the son of Kashtangarik, instigated by wicked people, attempted to abduct Gandharvadatta. When Jivanadhara learned of this, he, along with the Vidyadharas, who were stronger than him, went to conquer Jayagiri, the mountain of victory. || 340-341 ||
1 Veenaamaadaaya M., L. | 2 Sthito L. | 3 Shraye Punye |

Page #533:
---------------------------
Pañcasaptatitama Parva
505
Arising in anger, he (Jīvandhar) went against the enemy army. Then the king of the Vidyādharas, named Garuḍavega, the father of Gandharvadattā, ⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠⁠

Page #534:
---------------------------
506
From that time onwards, those two girls, due to the mutual attachment born from their learning, abandoned their envy and became free from jealousy. || 358 || Then, the citizens, desiring to play in the forest, were playing there. Seeing a dog, some mischievous children, out of their playfulness, started to beat it. || 359 || Frightened, the dog ran away and fell into a well, becoming near death. || 360 || Seeing this, the young Jivandhar, having his servants bring the dog out, filled its ears with the Pancha Namaskar mantra. || 361 || Accepting the Namaskar mantra, the dog became a Yaksha named Sudarshan, remembering his past life. || 362 || Returning to the young Jivandhar, he said, "I have attained this excellent fortune due to your grace." Thus, with divine ornaments, the grateful Yaksha, filling everyone with wonder, worshipped Jivandhar and said, "O Kumar! From now on, remember me in times of both sorrow and joy." || 363 || Thus, requesting the Kumar, he went to his own abode. The Acharya says, "The fruits of actions done without any reason are inevitable." || 364 || 365 || 

After playing in the forest for a long time, when everyone was returning, the king's thunderous elephant, maddened by intoxication, became agitated upon hearing the noise of the people. Filled with arrogance, he could not be controlled by ordinary humans. The elephant charged towards the chariot of Suramanjari. Seeing this, Jivandhar, quickly deciding on the actions of pacifying and controlling the elephant, approached him with a smile. Through thirty-two types of play, he made the elephant feel remorse and sorrow, but he himself did not feel any distress. Finally, the elephant stood still and was tied with a rope. Seeing all this, the citizens, praising Jivandhar's knowledge of elephants, entered the city. || 366 || 367 || 368 || 369 || 

Suramanjari, whose heart was agitated by the sight of Jivandhar, became infatuated with him from that time onwards. || 370 || Her parents, through her gestures, actions, and conversations, cleverly understood that she was longing for Jivandhar. || 371 ||

Page #535:
---------------------------
## The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

Knowing this, he informed his father and, with his permission, offered the daughter to the prosperous Kumar, Jiwandhar, for a prosperous union. || 372 || Then, with appropriate love, he enjoyed the desired pleasure. There, the people constantly recounted the tales of his valor and good fortune. || 373 || But the wicked Kashtangarik king, unable to bear the humiliation of Jiwandhar's thwarting his elephant, || 374 || in anger, declared, "This Jiwandhar, a mere Vaishya, has insulted me by hindering my elephant. His duty is to buy and sell things like harad, amalaki, and shunthi. But he has abandoned his caste duties and, filled with pride, engages in activities fit for a prince. Therefore, quickly send this wicked fellow to the jaws of Yama." Thus, he commanded Chand Danda, the chief protector of the city. || 375-377 || 

Chand Danda, with his army ready, rushed towards Jiwandhar in anger. Jiwandhar, knowing this, also went to meet him with his friends, eager for battle. He defeated Chand Danda without himself being harmed. This further enraged Kashtangarik, who sent a large army. Seeing the army, Jiwandhar, with a compassionate heart, thought, "What is the benefit of killing these insignificant creatures? I will pacify this wicked Kashtangarik by some means." Thinking thus, he remembered his friend, Sudarshan Yaksha, and sought his help. || 378-380 || 

Knowing Jiwandhar's plight, Sudarshan Yaksha pacified everything. Then, with Jiwandhar's permission, he placed him on the elephant named Vijayagiri and took him to his own home. It is indeed the mark of a true friend to show one's own home. || 381-383 || 

Jiwandhar's companions and relatives, unaware of his actions, trembled like delicate leaves swaying in the wind, unable to control themselves. But Gandharvadatta, knowing the reason for Jiwandhar's absence, remained calm. "The Kumar is safe, so do not fear. He will soon return," she reassured everyone with her wisdom. || 384-386 || 

Jiwandhar, staying comfortably in the Yaksha's abode for a long time, conveyed his desire to fight through gestures. || 387 ||

Page #536:
---------------------------
508
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraanam
Knowing his intention, the Yaksha gave him a ring that was radiant, capable of fulfilling desires, and could assume any form.  He then sent him down from the mountain, assuring him that he would not be afraid of anything.  The Yaksha followed him for a short distance and then, after performing his worship, departed.  || 388-389 ||
The Kumar, after traveling a short distance, arrived at a city called Chandraama.  The city was built with palaces made of lime, which made it appear as if it were bathed in moonlight. || 390 ||
The king of this city was Dhanapati, who protected his people like a Lokapala.  His queen was Tilottama, and they had a daughter named Padmottma. || 391 ||
The princess went to the forest to enjoy herself, but she was bitten by a venomous snake.  The king announced in his city that whoever could cure his daughter with gems, mantras, or medicines would be given the princess and half the kingdom. || 392-393 ||
A sage named Aditya had already predicted this event, so many snake doctors came to the city, lured by the princess, but they were unable to cure the poison.  The king's servants, following his orders, continued to search for a doctor.  While running around, they encountered the Kumar by chance.  They asked him anxiously, "Do you know how to cure poison?" || 394-396 ||
The Kumar replied, "I know a little."  The servants were pleased to hear this and took him to the princess with great joy. || 397 ||
Remembering the Yaksha, the Kumar, who was skilled in snake mantras, chanted a mantra and cured the princess of the venom. || 398 ||
The king was very pleased.  He saw the Kumar's brilliance and radiance and was certain that he was born into a royal family.  He gave him his daughter and half the kingdom, as he had promised.  The Kumar, along with the princess's thirty-two brothers, who were like Lokapalas, enjoyed himself for a long time, charmed by their virtues.  After staying there for a few days, he was inspired by fate and, without telling anyone, left the city quietly at night. || 399-402 ||
1. Mani-mantra - L.

Page #537:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter
506
Having reached a delightful forest outside, he saw a Jinalaya adorned with a thousand peaks. || 403 || After bowing to the infinite Lokas, with folded hands, he circumambulated thrice and began to perform the prescribed praise. || 404 || As if manifesting his inner affection outwardly, a Champaka tree blossomed with its flowers. || 405 || The cuckoos, previously mute, as if healed by the auspicious arrival of the Kumaras, began to sing sweet, audible sounds. || 406 || In the nearby Jaina temple, a pond filled with clear water, as if with crystal liquid, bloomed with lotus flowers. || 407 || All the water lilies were buzzing with bees, and the gates of the temple opened by themselves. || 408 || Seeing this, the devotion of the Jivandhara Kumaras increased. They bathed in the pond, achieving purity, and then, taking many flowers born in the same pond, worshipped the Jina, offering many rich and heartfelt prayers. || 409 || In that city, there was a daughter named Kshemasundari, born to the wealthy Seth Subhadra and his wife Nivriti, who was as beautiful as Lakshmi herself. || 410 || Earlier, the Muni Indra, the repository of humility, had predicted that when Kshemasundari's husband arrived, the Champaka tree would blossom, and other signs would appear. || 411 || The Seth had appointed men to observe her, and they were overjoyed at the sight of the Jivandhara Kumaras. || 412 || They declared that their mission was fulfilled and informed their master. The Seth, pleased, said that the words of the Munis never fail. || 413-414 || Thus, the Seth, delighted, offered his worthy daughter to the noble Jivandhara Kumaras according to the prescribed rites. || 415 || Later, the Seth said to the Jivandhara Kumaras, "When I lived in the city of Rajapura, King Satyandhara gave me this bow and these arrows. They are worthy of you, so please accept them." He then presented the bow and arrows. || 416 || The Jivandhara Kumaras, accepting the bow and arrows with joy, settled happily in that city. As time passed, they, with their inherent knowledge, set out on their journey. || 417 ||

Page #538:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, 
Having attained the Gandharva state, Jivandhar Kumar was found sitting comfortably.  Without anyone knowing, he returned to Rajapur.  This is fitting, for the festival of loved ones is the love of lovers.  After some days, like before, he left that city.  The virtuous Jivandhar Kumar, carrying bow and arrow, went to the country of Sujana, and reached Hemabh Nagar.  The king there was named Dridhamitra, and his queen was Nalina.  Their daughter was named Hemabha.  At the time of Hemabha's birth, a sage had said that in the Manohar forest, in the armory, during the archery practice, the arrow shot by the one whose arrow would return from the target would be the husband of this auspicious girl.  Hearing this order, all the archers of that time were practicing in the same way, hoping to win her hand.  By chance, Jivandhar Kumar also reached that place.  Seeing him, the archers said, "Brother, have you also practiced archery as per the king's order?"  Jivandhar Kumar replied, "Yes, I have."  Then the archers said, "Good, then shoot at this target."  Jivandhar Kumar, taking his prepared bow and arrow, shot at the target, but his arrow returned before reaching it.  Seeing this, those present informed the king.  The king was delighted and said, "The special creeper I was searching for has come to my feet itself."  Then, with great pomp and ceremony, he gave his daughter to Jivandhar Kumar.  The Acharyas say, "Behold, this is called punya."  Gunamitra, Bahumitra, Sumitra, Dhanamitra, and many other relatives of Jivandhar Kumar were all made proficient in all knowledge by him.  He lived there for a long time, enjoying the fruits of his past punya.  Meanwhile, Gandharvadatta would come to Jivandhar Kumar secretly, again and again.  Seeing this, one day Nandadhya asked, "Tell me, where do you go secretly? I also want to go there."  Smiling, Gandharvadatta replied, "Where I go...

Page #539:
---------------------------
The 57th Chapter

5.11 The bed named Smara Tarangini is presided over by a deity. Remembering your elder brother on that bed, sleep there according to the rules. || 434 || Thus, you will surely attain the proximity of satisfaction. Having understood this, he slept on that bed that night. || 435 || Then, the Vidya named Bhogini brought him to the bed with his elder brother. Then, seeing each other with joy, the Kumar Nandavya and Jivandhar embraced each other. || 436 || They stayed there after asking each other about their well-being. There is nothing more pleasing than the union of two brothers filled with joy. || 437 || In this famous land of good people, there is a great city named Nagar Shobha, ruled by the king named Dridhamitra. || 438 || His brother's name is Sumit, and his queen's name is Vasundhara. Their daughter, named Shrichandra, is endowed with beauty and knowledge. || 439 || When she was at the beginning of her full youth, she saw a pair of pigeons playing freely in the courtyard of her house. || 440 || Suddenly, she experienced a memory of her past life and fainted. Seeing her condition, those who were near her were disturbed. || 441 || The skilled ones sprinkled her with cool water mixed with sandalwood and khus, fanned her with a fan, and comforted her heart with soothing words. || 442 || They awakened her with pleasant words and dispelled her unconsciousness. What do friends who are well-wishers not do in times of trouble? || 443 || Hearing this, her parents, who loved their daughter, the beautiful Alak Sundari, were distressed by the news of their daughter's fainting. || 444 || They said to their daughter, "Go and find out the reason for her fainting." Hearing her parents' words, Alak Sundari, who was skilled in conversation, went to Shrichandra and asked her in private, "O Bhattarika! Tell me, what is the reason for your fainting?" In response, Shrichandra said, "O my dear friend, who is dearer to me than life! If you want to hear the reason for my fainting, listen with your mind focused. I have nothing to hide from you." Thus, remembering well, she told Alak Sundari the entire story of her past life. Alak Sundari was very intelligent, and she quickly understood everything. At that moment, she went to Shrichandra's parents and told them the reason for her fainting, as she had heard it before, in clear and sweet words. || 445-449 ||

Page #540:
---------------------------
512
In the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, it is said that she was born in her third previous birth. In the country of Hemananda, in the city of Rajapura, she was the head of the Vaishya clan. || 15 || Her name was Ratna Teja, and her beloved husband's name was Ratna Mala. They had a daughter named Surapa, who was unparalleled in beauty. She was not only beautiful in name but also in her qualities. || 45 || In the same city, in the Vaishya clan, a son named Suvarna Teja was born to Kanaka Teja and his wife Chandra Mala. He was very foolish and unlucky. || 452 || His parents had initially intended to give him to Anupama in marriage, but later, due to his poverty and foolishness, they disrespected him and gave her to another Vaishya son named Gunamitra, who was a jeweler. Anupama lived happily with him for some time. || 453-454 || One day, Gunamitra went on a sea voyage, boarding a ship. While leaving the mouth of the river, he fell into a large whirlpool and died. When Anupama heard the news, she went to that place and drowned herself. || 455 || After that, in the same city of Rajapura, Gunamitra's soul was reborn as a pigeon named Pavan Vega, and Anupama was reborn as a pigeon named Rati Vega, in the house of a wealthy Vaishya named Gandhotkata. || 456 || In Gandhotkata's house, his children were learning to write. Seeing them, the two pigeons also learned to write. Gandhotkata and his wife were both followers of the Shravaka vows, and seeing them, the pigeons also became very peaceful. Thus, the two pigeons, who had come from previous births, lived happily together. || 457-458 || Suvarna Teja, who had not been able to marry Anupama, harbored resentment towards Gunamitra and Anupama and died. After death, he was reborn as a cat. || 459 || One day, the pair of pigeons were playing together, and the cat saw them. He caught Rati Vega, the female pigeon, in the same way that Rahu swallows the moon. || 460 || Seeing this, the male pigeon, Pavan Vega, was filled with anger. He attacked the cat with his claws and beak, killing him and rescuing his wife. || 461 || One day, near a cave in the mountains near the same city, some wicked people had set a trap. Pavan Vega, the pigeon, got caught in it and died. Rati Vega, the female pigeon, returned home and informed everyone of her husband's death by writing with her beak. || 462-463 || Overwhelmed by the grief of her husband's loss, she also died. This was the story of their third previous birth.

Page #541:
---------------------------
## Chapter Fifty-Seven

**513** Today, seeing the pair of pigeons, she fainted due to the recollection of her past life. She told me everything clearly, as if she had been awakened by a rule. **15**

Hearing these words of Alakasundari, her parents were very distressed, desiring to find a husband for their daughter. **466**

They had the story of her past life written clearly on a piece of cloth. They called Rangateja, a very clever actor among the actors, and his wife Madanalata, gave them gifts, honored them properly, explained the task to be done, and said, "Do this work diligently," and gave them the cloth. **467-468**

Taking the cloth, the actor and actress went to the Pushpak forest, spread it out there, and began to dance in front of everyone. **469**

Meanwhile, Shrichandra's father also went to that forest to play. There, he saw the sage Samadhigupta, circumambulated him, bowed down, listened to the nature of Dharma, and then asked, "O venerable one! Where is my daughter's husband from her past life? Please tell me." **470-471**

The sage, who possessed the divine vision of knowledge, said, "He is in Hemabhnagar today, and has reached full youth." **472**

Hearing the sage's words, the king, along with the actor, his friends, and the entire family, went to Hemabhnagar. Arriving there, he organized a wonderful dance that captivated the mind. Nandadhya also went to see the dance, along with the other people of the city. **473-474**

But, due to the recollection of her past life, she suddenly fainted. After special cooling treatments, when her fainting spell subsided, her elder brother, Jeevandhar Kumar, asked her the reason for fainting. In response, Nandadhya told him the whole story of the painting and said to Jeevandhar, "That same soul of Gunamitra, today I have become your younger brother." Hearing this, Jeevandhar Kumar was very pleased and began the great Mahamaha puja for the marriage, which he had already started. **475-477**

I will tell you another story related to this, listen to it. There was a king of the Kiratas, famous as Harivkram. Fearing his brothers and relatives, he built a city called Vanagiri on Mount Dishagir in the forest called Kapittha. The wife of the lord of that forest was a beautiful woman named Sundari, and she had a son named Vanaraja. Vatavriksh, Mrityu, Chitrasena, 
**478-480**

**464** A lovely daughter named Shrichandra was born. 

**465** Today, seeing the pair of pigeons, she fainted due to the recollection of her past life. She told me everything clearly, as if she had been awakened by a rule.

Page #542:
---------------------------
514
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, Bhriksha, Shatrumardan, Atibala, and these were the servants of the Bhil.  Lohajanga and Shrisena were the friends of his son, Vanaraja.  One day, Lohajanga and Shrisena both went to Hemabhanagara.  There, in the forest, Shrichandra was playing, like the moonlight.  Seeing her, they both praised her.  There, a horse came to drink water.  Seeing it, they both scorned the horse's protector, took the horse away, and gave it to Harivkram Bhil, satisfying him.  After that, those two friends, desiring good, went from Harivkram to Vanaraja, who followed the path of injustice, and they began to describe well the beauty, radiance, and other qualities of Shrichandra.  Hearing this, Vanaraja's desire for her was awakened.  In a previous birth, Vanaraja was Suvarna Tejas, and Shrichandra was a girl named Anupama.  At that time, Suvarna Tejas desired Anupama, but he could not obtain her.  With that same love, he said to his two friends, "By any means, bring her to me."  478-486

He did not just say it, he also sent those two friends with great warriors.  The two friends went to Hemabhanagara, and first found the location of the girl's golden house.  Then, they dug a tunnel and reached the girl.  There, they wrote a letter to this effect and placed it in the tunnel: "Shrisena and Lohajanga, the men of valor, have taken the girl.  Just as Shani and Mangal go with the line of the moon at night, so we two are going to Vanaraja with the girl."  They placed this letter in the tunnel and took Shrichandra away.  The next day, at sunrise, when the letter was read, the news of the girl's abduction was known, and the king urged the girl's two brothers to bring her back.  The two brothers went quickly and began to fight with them.  Seeing her brothers, Kinnaramitra and Yakshamitra, fighting, Shrichandra was very sad, so she vowed that she would not eat anything until she had seen her shrine, located within her city.  Making this vow, she remained silent.  487-492

Here, Shrisena and Lohajanga, the friends of Vanaraja, defeated the king's sons in battle, and very happily handed the girl over to Vanaraja.  493

When Vanaraja saw that Shrichandra was averse to him, he was clever in devising ways to reconcile with her.  
1. Vanacharayanatmajasyā-l.
2. Imā mayi prītāṁ kurute iti bhāvaḥ. Kurvīte māla.

Page #543:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter
515

Those who know the ways of persuasion, enter the heart slowly. Tell me, why are you sitting like this? Adorn yourself with ornaments. || 416 || Adorn yourself with ornaments, wear garlands, eat delicious food. Confide in us, and we will tell you tales of happiness. || 497 || Having attained human birth after wandering through countless births in suffering, do not waste it in vain by turning away from pleasures. || 498 || There is no one superior to the Vanaraja in this world, in terms of beauty and other qualities. Why don't you open your eyes and see? || 499 || Like Lakshmi with the Chakravarti, like beauty with the trees of ornaments, like moonlight with the full moon, you should stay with the Vanaraja. || 500 || Having obtained the jewel of the crown, who would be foolish enough to despise it? Thus, the messengers harassed Sri Chandra with these and other fearful words. || 501 || Hearing this harassment, Harivikram, the father of the Vanaraja, secretly thought, "These messengers are harassing her, so perhaps she might commit suicide." Therefore, he scolded the Vanaraja and kept her with his daughters. || 502-503 || Meanwhile, all the brothers, including Dridhamitra, gathered their armies and surrounded the Vanaraja's city. || 504 || On the other side, the enemy forces also came out with a desire to fight. Seeing this, the compassionate Jivandhar Kumar thought, "What is the benefit of war, which destroys countless lives?" Thinking this, he immediately remembered his Sudarshan Yaksha. As soon as he remembered him, the Yaksha, without causing any harm to anyone, handed over the girl to Jivandhar Kumar. It is right, because those who fear sin achieve their goals through proper means. || 505-507 || With the task accomplished, Dridhamitra and all the others stopped the war and marched towards the city. But the Vanaraja did not return, still desiring war. Seeing this, the Yaksha, considering him to be of evil intent, forcefully seized him and handed him over to Jivandhar Kumar. Sriman Jivandhar Kumar, having imprisoned the Vanaraja, stayed with his army on the banks of the lake called Senaramy. || 510 ||

Page #544:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, a Charana Muni was suddenly seen by the great ones. He had come for alms, so Jivandhar Kumar got up and properly greeted him. He gave him a good meal with great devotion. As a result of this donation, he received great merit and five wonders. 

Seeing the fruit of this donation, the forest king remembered all the details of his previous birth. 

Meanwhile, Harivikram, hearing that his son, the forest king, was imprisoned, came to fight with a large army. The Yaksha captured him and gave him to Jivandhar Kumar. 

Then the forest king told everyone his story: "In my third birth, I was a Vaishya named Suvarna Tejas. After death, I became a cat. At that time, this Shrichandra's life was a dove, so I tried to kill it. Once, I heard a Muni teaching about the four paths, and I gave up all my hatred. After death, I became this forest king. Out of love from my previous life, I abducted Shrichandra."

Hearing the forest king's words, everyone decided that he had not abducted the girl out of arrogance, but out of love from his previous life. They were all calm. 

They released the forest king and his father from their bonds. This is the nature of the righteous. 

Then they all went to the king's city (Hemabhnagar). They stayed there for two or three days and then went to the city of Nagarshobha. There, Shrichandra, who possessed auspicious fortune, was given to Nandavya, the young lord of wealth, with great pomp. After the marriage ceremony was completed, they all returned to Hemabhnagar with their relatives. On the way, they stopped by the shore of a lake. They left Jivandhar Kumar there and went to fetch water from the lake. As they went, they were stung by poisonous bees. They returned in fear and told Jivandhar Kumar. Hearing this and thinking about it, Jivandhar Kumar was surprised and said, "There must be some reason for this." To find out the reason, he immediately remembered the Yaksha. 

The Yaksha arrived quickly and destroyed all his Khechari Vidya. He then quickly brought the Vidyadhar before Jivandhar Kumar.

Page #545:
---------------------------
## The 57th Chapter

This is the story of how this lake is protected. The young prince asked the celestial being, "Why do you protect this lake?" The celestial being, with a clear mind, replied, "Listen, O noble one, I will tell you my story. In a previous life, I was the son of Pushpadanta, a wealthy garland maker, and his wife Kusuma-shri, in the city of Rajapura. In the same city, Chandrabha, the son of Nandini, the wife of Dhanadatta, was born. He was my friend. One day, you explained the nature of Dharma to him. Hearing that, my heart also became filled with love for Dharma. 

I renounced alcohol, meat, and other such things. As a result, after death, I became this celestial being. Once, I saw two Charana monks in the Siddhakoota Jinalaya. I approached them with great humility. Hearing about our past lives and the connection between us, I have been protecting this lake from others to see you. I will now tell you the story of our connection, as revealed by divine knowledge.

In the Dhaataki-khand island, in the eastern part of the Meru, in the eastern Videha region, there is a country called Pushkalavati. In its city of Pundarikin, King Jayandhara ruled. He had a son named Jayadratha, born to his queen Jayavati. One day, Jayadratha went to the beautiful forest called Manohara to play. There, he saw a young swan by the lake. He was fascinated by it and had his clever servants bring it to him. He then started taking care of it. Seeing this, the swan's parents, filled with sorrow, cried out in the sky. Hearing their cries, one of your servants, with a bow drawn to his ear, shot an arrow and killed the swan's father. It is right, for what is there that is not permissible for wicked people?

Seeing this, Jayadratha's mother's heart was filled with compassion. She asked, "What is this?" After learning the whole story from the servant, she became angry at the servant who had killed the swan's father. She scolded you, saying, "O son, this is not right for you. Quickly reunite this swan with its mother." In response, you said, "I did this out of ignorance." Thus, with a heavy heart, you condemned yourself for your actions.

Page #546:
---------------------------
518
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, on the sixteenth day after the day of the abduction, just as the rainy season brings the Chatak bird together with the rain-laden clouds, the spring season brings the flower together with the mango vine, and the sunrise brings the bee together with the lotus, so too, his mother was reunited with him. || 54 || 

Thus, with many other amusements, Jayadratha's time passed continuously in happiness. One day, for some reason, he became detached from worldly pleasures. As a result, he renounced the burden of the kingdom and took up the burden of asceticism. At the end of his life, he left his body and became a god in the Sahasrar heaven. || 543-544 || 

There, he enjoyed divine pleasures for eighteen sagar kalpas. After that, he was born here again due to the ripening of his good and bad karma. || 545 || 

The servant who had killed the swan became a kaṣṭhāṅgārika (one who burns wood). And it was he who killed your father in battle before your birth. You kept the swan's child separated from its parents for sixteen days. As a result of that sin, you were separated from your brothers and sisters for sixteen years. Hearing this story told by the Vidyadhara, Jivandharakumar said, "You are my benefactor." And he honored him greatly. || 546-548 || 

Then, with great joy, he went to Hemabhanagara with everyone else. He lived there, enjoying the pleasures of love and material possessions as he wished, in the company of his beloved ones. || 549 || 

Now, another story is told, related to this one. On the day after Nanday left Rajapur, Madhura and his other friends asked Gandharvadatta, "Where have the two princes gone? You know everything, tell us." In reply, Gandharvadatta said with great respect, "Why are you worried about them? Both brothers are living happily in Hemabhanagara, in the land of the Sujan." || 550-552 || 

Knowing their location from Gandharvadatta, Madhura and all his friends were eager to see them. They asked permission from their loved ones and, with joy, set out on their journey. || 553 || 

On their way, they reached the Dandaka forest and rested in the hermitage of the ascetics. Out of curiosity, the ascetic women came to see them. Among them was Mahadevi Vijaya. Seeing them, she asked, "Who are you? Where have you come from? And where are you going?" Vijaya asked all this with great affection. || 554-555 || 

When Madhura and the others told her their whole story, she said clearly, "This is my son's family, along with his wife."

Page #547:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter
516

Knowing that this was the group of youths, she was very pleased. She said, "You may rest here today, and when you return, bring him here." 556-557

She requested them properly. They were all doubtful, thinking, "She is like Jivandhar in form. Could she be his mother?" 558

They satisfied her with sweet and agreeable words, saying, "We will do so." Then they went on. After going a short distance, they were troubled by the Bhils, but they defeated them in battle through their own prowess and continued on their way as they wished. 559-560

Further on, they met other Bhils on the road, and all of them together went to Hemabhapur and began to plunder the merchants there. The townspeople were enraged and, raising their hands and shouting loudly, informed Jivandhar Kumar of this. 561

Jivandhar Kumar, the possessor of inconceivable prowess and full of compassion, went and stopped the army of Bhils in battle, and he took back all the wealth they had plundered and returned it to the merchants. 562

Meanwhile, Madhur and the others had been fighting for a long time, and seeing the arrows marked with his name, Jivandhar Kumar recognized them all. Then they all met Jivandhar Kumar, and they told him all the news from Rajapur and stayed there happily for some time. 563-564

Then they took Jivandhar Kumar and set out for their own city. They came to the Dandaka forest to rest. There they met Mahadevi Vijaya. Her breasts were full of milk and stood high because of her affection. Her eyes were filled with tears and were becoming dull. Her body was very thin. She was tormented by thousands of worries. Her hair had become matted. Her breath was constantly hot, and her lips had changed color. Her teeth were covered with a thick layer of grime because she had not eaten betel nut or anything else. 565-568

Just as Rukmini was distressed to see Pradyumna, so too was Mahadevi Vijaya distressed to see her son. It is right, for seeing a beloved object after a long time is always a cause of sorrow. 569

The mother, who had not touched the nectar of happiness born from the touch of her son, fell at his feet, joining her palms in supplication, saying, "O Kumar, rise! You are a hundred times blessed. May you be blessed a hundred times over!" 570-571

Page #548:
---------------------------
The Great Purana, Uttara Purana
From the association of happiness born from the sight of the opponent. Kumar, frightened, or my sorrow suddenly went away. || 572 || Thus, while the goddess was speaking with you, in the meantime. The Yaksha, Daksha, arrived quickly out of affection for the Kumar. || 573 || Having worshipped all separately with bathing, anointing, all ornaments, clothes, and food, etc., out of Jain compassion. || 574 || He dispelled the sorrow of the mother and son with sweet words full of wisdom and truth, and with stories of Madana, etc. || 575 || He went towards his own place, having accomplished the right action. That friendship which is experienced by friends in times of adversity. || 576 || The queen, considering him to be a great virtuous soul, took the Kumar aside. And said to him, the wise and valiant, || 577 || "Satyandhara Maharaja, your father, was the king of this city. The enemy, the Kaṣṭhāṅgārika, killed him and sits on the throne. Therefore, he is your enemy. You are intelligent, so it is not right for you to abandon your father's place." || 578 || Hearing this, and understanding it well, Jīvandhara Kumar thought, "Valour manifested without time and means is not capable of bearing fruit. Therefore, like grain, one should wait for the time that is the cause of the work." || 579 || Although anger arose in Jīvandhara Kumar, he suppressed it in his heart and said to his mother, "Mother, when this work is completed, I will send an army with Nandavyaka as its commander to bring you. Until then, stay here without sorrow." Saying this, and placing all the things worthy of him and some family members near her, the great-minded Jīvandhara Kumar went to Rajapur himself. || 580 - 583 || Going near the city of Rajapur, he sent all his servants, etc., into the city beforehand, saying, "Don't tell anyone about my arrival." And he himself, wearing the guise of a merchant, entered the city by the power of the ring of knowledge. He sat in a shop somewhere. || 584 - 585 || Sitting near him, Sagaradatta Seth gained many chests of jewels, etc., and other rare things. Seeing this, he thought, "This is the one for whom the knower of the auspicious said..."

Page #549:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter

521. The astrologers, as directed by the merchant, declared that this was the auspicious time. He gave his daughter, Vimala, born of Kamala, to him. 587. After the marriage, Jivandhar Kumar stayed happily with Sagaradatt Seth for some days. Then, on another occasion, he went to the assembly of the Kaṣṭhāṅgārikas, disguised as a wandering ascetic. 588. Entering the assembly and seeing the Kaṣṭhāṅgārikas, he blessed them and said, "O King! Listen, I am a virtuous guest, I desire food from you, feed me." 589. Hearing this, the Kaṣṭhāṅgārikas readily agreed to feed him. "This is like a flower that has sprung from the fruit of my efforts." 590. Thinking thus, he sat on the next seat and ate. After eating, he left. 591. Then, going to the group of kings, he announced separately, "I have in my hand the best medicine, such as Vāśīkaraṇa-cūrṇa, which gives immediate results. Whoever desires it, may take it." 592. Hearing this, all the people laughed and said, "Look at his shamelessness! He is so old, yet he keeps Vāśīkaraṇa-cūrṇa, Añjana, and Bandhaka medicines." 593. Saying this, they laughed and said, "O Brāhmaṇa! There is a famous girl in this city named Guṇamālā." 594. "Jivandhar has not praised the fragrance of my cūrṇa. Therefore, he has become hateful to all men. You subdue her with your cūrṇa and Añjana, and then we will buy your mantras and medicines for a very high price." 595. Hearing this, the Brāhmaṇa became angry and said, "Your Jivandhar is a fool, how can he know the difference between the fragrance of cūrṇa, etc.?" 596. In reply, all the people became angry and said to the Brāhmaṇa, "Jivandhar is the best of men. Without considering this, why are you talking like this to him?" 597. "O arrogant one, who is deluded by false scriptures! Have you not heard the famous saying that self-praise and the criticism of others are no different from death?" 598. Thus, the Brāhmaṇa was rebuked by them. He said, "Are there not people like you who praise me? I am also a man." 599. Thus, praising himself, the arrogant Brāhmaṇa vowed, "I will make Guṇamālā my concubine in a moment." 600. Making this vow, he set out for Guṇamālā's house. 601.

Page #550:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana, a certain Brahmin, seeing a woman standing at the door, said to a maidservant, "Tell your mistress that a Brahmin is standing at the door." 

The maidservant informed her mistress of the Brahmin's words.  Then, with her permission, the old Brahmin was welcomed and asked, "Where have you come from and where are you going?" 

In response, the Brahmin said, "I have come from behind and I will go forward."  Hearing this, the people standing near the woman, Gunamala, laughed.  Seeing this, the Brahmin said, "Do not laugh like this. Old age brings about a change in one's nature. Will you not also grow old?"

Then, they asked him again, "Where will you go forward?"  The Brahmin replied, "My journey will continue until I reach the Kanya Tirtha."

Hearing the Brahmin's words, everyone laughed and said, "He is old in body and age, but not in mind."  Then, Gunamala seated him on a comfortable seat and served him food.  Afterward, she said, "Now, go wherever you wish."

The Brahmin replied, "You have spoken well, O noble one."  He praised her and, with difficulty, rose, leaning on his staff.  He then climbed onto her bed, as if she had invited him to do so.  Seeing this, the maidservants said, "Look at his shamelessness!"  They tried to pull him away from the bed by holding his hands.

The Brahmin said, "You have spoken correctly.  Indeed, shame is found in women, not in men.  If men were to have shame like women, then how could their union with women, which is adorned by love, take place?"

Hearing the Brahmin's words, Gunamala thought, "This is not just a Brahmin, but some other man who has come here by changing his form through the art of transformation."  Thinking this, she stopped the maidservants and said to the Brahmin, "What is the fault? You are my guest, so sit on this bed."

As the night passed, the old Brahmin, who knew the different types of pure and native voices, sang sweet songs that captivated the ears and minds of all.  The songs he sang were as beautiful as the songs sung by Jivandhar Kumar during the wedding of Gandharvadatta.

Page #551:
---------------------------
The 57th chapter.  Having risen in the morning, Gunamala approached the sage with humility and said, "May you be awakened in all branches of knowledge, including the branch of love."  ||18||

"I have diligently studied the scriptures of Dharma, Artha, and Kama.  Of these, the fruits of the branches of Dharma and Artha are determined by the Kama Shastra." ||19||

"How is that?" Gunamala asked.  "I will explain," said the sage.  "There are five senses, and their objects are also fivefold." ||20||

"The eight types of touch, beginning with rough, are described in the scriptures.  The wise have said that there are six types of taste, beginning with sweet.  Smell is of two types: natural and artificial.  All things, whether animate or inanimate, have a smell, either pleasant or unpleasant." ||622||

"There are five types of form, distinguished by white, black, etc.  There are seven types of musical notes, beginning with Sa, which are produced by the interaction of the soul and non-soul." ||623||

"Thus, there are twenty-eight objects of the five senses.  Each of these has two variations, desirable and undesirable, making a total of fifty-six." ||624||

"The desirable objects are attained by those who perform virtuous deeds.  Virtue is attained through Dharma, and Dharma is defined as the renunciation of forbidden objects." ||625||

"Therefore, wise people renounce forbidden objects and experience the remaining objects.  Those who do this are considered to be knowledgeable in the Kama Shastra." ||626||

"There are some flaws in the objects you experience," said the sage.  Hearing this, Gunamala said, "Please teach me how to overcome these flaws.  I will become your disciple."  The sage then taught Gunamala the arts and made her proficient in them. ||627-628||

One day, they all went to the forest to wander.  While sitting in a secluded place with Gunamala, the sage revealed his true form.  Seeing this, the girl was filled with doubt and sat silently, blushing.  Seeing this, the sage quickly reassured her by telling ancient stories related to fragrant powders. ||629-631||

Then, he resumed his former form and sat on a bed of flowers.  He said to Gunamala, "Come, let us walk together." ||632||

Page #552:
---------------------------
524
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, seeing him doing that act, all the princes were amazed. They all forgot the mantras and other things. || 633 || Then, from that forest, the one who had come in the guise of a Brahmin, Gunamala, told his mother and father about the arrival of Jivanadhara. || 634 || They, by the rites of marriage, made her his beloved. After staying there for a few days, Jivanadhara, along with Gunamala, enjoyed all the pleasures with all his relatives. Then, praised by the people, Jivanadhara, the one with great fortune, mounted the Gandhagaja named Vijayagiri, surrounded by his four-fold army, and entered the house of Gandhotkata. || 635-636 || Hearing about this festival, the Kashtangarika became very angry. He said, "Look, this son of a Vaishya, intoxicated, does not fear me at all." Saying this, he became openly angry. Seeing this, the best ministers pacified him, saying, "This is Jivanadhara Kumar, who has achieved prosperity due to the rise of merit. He is accompanied by Gandharvadatta, who is like Lakshmi herself. He has been enriched by the Yaksha, his unwavering friend. He is accompanied by Madhura and other friends. Therefore, he is great and possesses invincible prowess. Therefore, it is not appropriate to be hostile towards him. Moreover, there is no reason to fight with the powerful." With such wise words, the ministers quickly pacified the Kashtangarika. || 637-643 ||
Sudharmacharaya tells King Shrenik, "Now, I will tell you another story, different from this. In the Videha country, there is a famous city called Videha. King Gopendra protects it. King Gopendra, who destroys his enemies, has a queen named Prithvi Sundari. They have a daughter named Ratnawati. Ratnawati had vowed that she would adorn the one who is skilled in archery with a garland, and would not marry any other man. Knowing this vow of his daughter, her father thought, "At this time, Jivanadhara Kumar, who knows archery and is extremely wealthy, is the only one. Therefore, I will take this daughter to him." Thinking this, he went to the Rajapur city with his daughter and all his army, and there he announced the Swayamvara ceremony. || 644-647 || Hearing this announcement, all the Bhoomikachari and Vidyadharas
1 Yatnato Lo. 2 Amandyavikramo'nena Lo.

Page #553:
---------------------------
The Fifty-Seventh Canto

When the king came to the city for the svayamvara ceremony, many kings stumbled and failed in piercing the Candrakavyadhana. Seeing them, the Jivandharakumara arose. First, he paid obeisance to the Siddha Parameshthi, then showed respect to his preceptor Aryavarman, and then ascended the Candrakavyadhana like the rising sun ascending the peak of a mountain. At that time, he was shining brilliantly and pierced the Candrakavyadhana without any error, and roared a lion's roar that resounded in all directions.

The experts in archery then praised him, saying, "Well done!" And the maiden Ratnavati, pleased, garlanded him.

The noble men present there were delighted, thinking that the union of these two was as appropriate as the meeting of the swan and the autumn season. The wise and moderate men were indifferent, thinking that the victory of the virtuous is nothing surprising.

But the vile Kashthangarika and others, who had previously suffered defeat, were reminded of their past humiliation and were provoked by wicked anger. They prepared to forcibly abduct the maiden through a fierce battle.

Jivandharakumara, skilled in statecraft, understood their malice. He then promptly sent several emissaries, along with gifts, to the feudatories of King Satyandhra, conveying the following message:

"I am the son born to the victorious queen of King Satyandhra. Due to the fruition of my past deeds, I was born and then separated from my parents, and grew up in the house of the respectable merchant. This wicked Kashthangarika, who used to earn his livelihood by selling charcoal, was made a minister by your king. He is a person of the lowest nature, who has struck down his masters like a snake, and has now established himself on their kingdom. He is worthy of destruction not only by me but also by you, as he is an enemy. Even if he escapes to the nether regions, he will surely be killed by me. You are the feudatories, devotees, warriors, and beneficiaries of King Satyandhra. As grateful and righteous individuals, you should eliminate this ungrateful one."

Page #554:
---------------------------
526
Hearing this message, the Kumar, the son of the king, said, "This is indeed true."  Many Samantas, honoring him, joined him. || 664 || 
Then, with his army prepared, the Kumar himself attacked the enemy.  He fought in many ways and defeated the enemy army for a long time. || 665 || 
The Kumar, intoxicated with pride and extremely powerful, rode the elephant named Vijayagiri.  The enemy was riding the arrogant, powerful elephant named Asani Vega, whose intelligence had been buried for a long time.  The Kumar, filled with anger, killed the enemy, Asani Vega, with his chakra.  Seeing this, the enemy army fled in fear.  Then, the Kumar reassured them and declared peace. || 666-668 || 
Then, the Kumar called all his brothers and, seeing them humble, made them happy with appropriate words and actions. || 669 || 
After the worship of the Jina, auspicious ceremonies were performed.  Then, the Yaksha and all the kings together performed the coronation of the Kumar.  After that, he had a grand wedding with Ratnawati and tied the crown of the queen on Gandharvadatta. || 670-671 || 
He brought his mother Vijaya and other women like Hemama.  With them all, the Kumar attained supreme sovereignty.  He was extremely powerful and his enemies were destroyed.  He ruled all his subjects justly, protecting them and fulfilling their desires.  He enjoyed the pleasures he had received effortlessly as the fruits of his good deeds. || 672-673 || 
One day, the king was wandering in the garden called Suramalaya.  There, he saw the Muni named Vardharma.  He went near him and bowed down.  He learned the nature of the truth from him and, taking vows, purified his right vision.  His brothers, Nanda, Adhya, etc., also took the vows of right vision and right conduct.  In this way, the Kumar spent his time happily with his close companions.  Then, one day, he went to the Ashoka forest.  There, he saw two groups of monkeys fighting with their anger burning.  He became detached from the world.  In the middle of that forest, there was a Charana Muni named Prashastavanka.  The Kumar respectfully paid his respects to him and, according to what he had heard before, listened to the lineage of his past lives. || 674-678 || 
1.  Some texts read "Vinyena Aavalokya" here.

Page #555:
---------------------------
527
The fifty-seventh chapter, having performed the worship of the Jina, is about the purity of Vardhamana. The arrival of the victorious Jina in the garden of Sura and Malaya. ||79|| Having heard of his glory and having worshipped the Supreme Lord, he gave the kingdom to Vasundhara Kumar, the son of Mahadevi Gandharvadatta, according to the rules. ||18|| Vasundhara Kumar, whose delusion was extinguished and whose mind was vast, along with his maternal uncles and other kings, and Nanda, Madhura, and others, renounced all attachments and embraced asceticism. ||681|| For those who are kings, enjoyments and pleasures are ultimately abandoned. ||682|| Gandharvadatta and the other queens, who had embraced the right faith, along with their mothers, adopted the excellent asceticism near Chandana, along with Satyadhara Mahadevi's wife Vijaya. ||683|| For one great man becomes the cause of the fulfillment of the desires of many. ||684|| The Muni, Jivandhara, who you inquired about, O King, is a great ascetic and is currently an Atkevali. ||685|| Having destroyed his karmas, he will become a Grihakevali and, after dwelling with the Tirthankara, will attain liberation on the Vipula mountain, having destroyed all his karmas. ||686|| There, he will be complete in the eight qualities, fulfilled, and free from the stain of karmas. ||687|| Hearing this nectar-like speech of the Ganadhara, Sudharma, the king was pleased. For whose sake is Dharma not done? ||688||
I bow down to Jivandhara, the Lord of Lakshmi, with folded hands, who, by the merit of his past deeds, gave eight daughters to others, which is rare; who sent his father's murderer to the other world in battle; who, having renounced the world, destroyed the darkness of karmas and shone with the light of liberation. ||689||
After spending sixteen days in the house of his wife, he renounced his worldly life and, with compassion, left his parents. ||689||

Page #556:
---------------------------
528
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, having obtained the sixteenth Sama, the self-absorption.
O Jivanadhara, do not commit such a sin, it is not auspicious. || 690 ||
Where is the death of the father, King Satyanadhara, where is birth in the cremation ground, where is being raised in a Vaishya's house, where is the favor of the Yaksha by oneself, where is the attainment of that rise, and where is the killing of the enemy. This is the strange result of karma in this Jivanadhara Maharaj. || 691 || Thus, in the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana Sangraha, composed by Bhagavadgunabhadracharya, known as Chandana,
Aryika and Jivanadhara Swami's biography, this is the seventy-fifth
3 self-absorption.

Page #557:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

Then, surrounded by gods and demons, the great Mahavira, having wandered through various lands, returned to Rajagriha. [1]

Honored by twelve assemblies, he resided on the Vipulachala mountain. The king, Shrenik, went to praise him, and on the way, he saw the Muni Dharmaruchi seated on a stone under a tree. The Muni was like a still ocean, unwavering like a lamp, and lofty like a cloud laden with water. He had conquered the senses, was seated on a comfortable cushion, his breath was slightly restrained, and his eyes were half-closed. [2-4]

Seeing the Muni meditating, Shrenik bowed to him, but the Muni's face was somewhat distorted, which made Shrenik feel a little apprehensive. From there, he went to the presence of the Lord Mahavira Jinenadra, where he folded his hands and praised him. Then, praising Gautam Ganadhara, he asked, "O Lord! I saw a Muni on the way, meditating as if he were the very embodiment of meditation. Who is he, O Lord? I am very curious to know. Please tell me." [5-7]

In response to King Shrenik's question, the Lord of words, Shri Ganadhara, said, "In the Anga country of this Bharat Kshetra, there is a city called Champa, filled with all things. The king there is Shwetavahna. Hearing the essence of Dharma from the Lord Mahavira, his mind was filled with three types of detachment. He entrusted the burden of the kingdom to his son, Vimala Vahana, and embraced the path of restraint with many others. He has been residing here, having wandered for many days with the group of Munis, maintaining unbroken restraint. He always cherished the ten Dharmas, and therefore, he is known as Dharmaruchi by the people. This is fitting, for true friendship exists among all beings." [8-12]

Today, after a month of fasting, he went into the city for alms. Three men came together to him. One of them was a scholar of human characteristics. Seeing the Muni, he said, "His features are those of a king, but he wanders for alms. Therefore, according to the scriptures..."

Page #558:
---------------------------
The Mahapurana, Uttara Purana

"What is said in the scriptures is false," said one, accusing the mendicant. "What is said in the scriptures is not false," said another, refuting him.  || 14 ||

This king, renouncing his kingdom, became a sage. For some reason, he became disillusioned with his son, who was still a child, and entrusted his kingdom to him, while he himself engaged in his own pursuits. || 15 ||

Hearing this, another said, "What good is his penance, which is the cause of sin? He is a wicked soul. He has abandoned his son, who is incapable of ruling, and entrusted the kingdom to him, only to pursue his own selfish interests. He has been bound by his ministers and others, and his kingdom has been divided, and he is experiencing the consequences of his sins." || 16-18 ||

Hearing these words, the sage, moved by affection and pride, left the city without eating and went to the forest. He took shelter under a tree, and external causes arose, causing the fierce competition of the passions of anger within him.  || 19-20 ||

Due to the accumulation of afflictions, his three evil karmas increased. He contemplated violence and other forms of suppression against his ministers and others, and entered into the fierce meditation of protection and joy. || 21-22 ||

"If he remains in this state for another moment, he will become worthy of a hellish life. Therefore, O Shrenik, go quickly and enlighten him. Tell him to abandon this evil meditation, to extinguish the fire of anger, and to dispel the web of delusion. Let him take up the practice of restraint, which he has abandoned, for it is the means of liberation. This attachment to wife, children, and relatives is unwholesome and increases the cycle of existence. Abandon it!" || 23-25 ||

With such wise words, and with firm resolve, he was able to bring the sage back to his senses.  || 26 ||

Burning away the dense darkness of his harmful karmas with the fire of pure meditation, he became pure in nature, having attained the ninefold liberation. || 27 ||

Hearing the words of the Ganadhara, King Shrenik went to the sage and, following his instructions, quickly pacified him. || 28 ||

The sage, having obtained the resources of peace born from the destruction of passions, attained liberation through the second pure meditation. || 29 ||

(Note: The text mentions "Dharadhuri" in one place, which is a variant reading.)

Page #559:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

Then, the king Shrenik, along with the श्रेणिक, Vritrahan, and others, performed the puja for the Kevali Dharma-ruchi. After that, he went to the presence of the Lord Vira-nath. || 30 ||

Upon arriving, he asked the Ganadhara Swami, "O Lord! Who will be the last Kevali to be praised in this Bharat-kshetra?" The Ganadhara was about to answer when, at that moment, the Brahma-Indra named Vidyumali, adorned with a radiant crown, arrived. He was born in the Brahma-hridya Vimana. His four consorts were Priyadarshana, Sudarshana, Vidyudvega, and Prabhavega. He came with all of them. After arriving, he paid homage to the Jina-endra and then sat down in his designated place. || 31-33 ||

Looking at him, the Ganadhara Swami said to King Shrenik, "By this one, the cessation of Kevala-jnana will occur. That is, after this, there will be no more Kevali." If you wish to know how this will happen, I will tell you. Listen. Seven days from today, this Brahma-indra will fall from heaven and enter the womb of Jindaasi, the wife of Seth Das in this city. Before entering the womb, Jindaasi will see five dreams: an elephant, a lake, a field of rice, a smokeless fire with its flame rising upwards, and Jambu fruits brought by divine Kumaras. This son will be very fortunate and radiant. His name will be Jambu-kumar. The Anavrata Devas will worship him. He will be very famous and polite. From the beginning of his youth, he will be free from vices. At the time when Lord Mahavira attains liberation, I too will attain Kevala-jnana. After that, along with the Ganadhara Sudharma-acharya, I will bring joy to those who are burning in the fire of the world, with the water of Dharma-amrita. I will come to this city again and reside on the Vipulachal mountain. Hearing of my arrival, the king of this city, Kunik, the son of Chelini, will come with his entire family. He will worship and pay homage to me. After hearing the nature of Dharma, he will adopt the means of heaven and liberation, such as charity, good conduct, and fasting. || 34-42 ||

At that time, Jambu-kumar will also be eager to renounce the world and take initiation. But his brothers and relatives will persuade him, saying, "After a few years have passed, we will also take initiation with you." He will not be able to resist their words and will return to the city at that time. Then, his brothers and relatives, desiring to bind him in delusion, will say, "Let us arrange his marriage. Relatives are obstacles to his welfare." || 43-45 ||

Page #560:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, Uttarapurana,
Suta Sagardasa's Padmavati, with auspicious marks, is like a second Padma Shri, with golden waist and auspicious eyes. || 45 ||
Suta Kubera Das's daughter, born to Kanakmala, is Kanakshri, with auspicious eyes, worthy of being seen by the king Vaishravana. || 47 ||
Vinayashri, daughter of Vaishravana Datt, is known for her humility, and Rupa Shri, daughter of Dhanadatt, is known for her beauty. || 48 ||
These four daughters, given by Sagar Datt, will be married according to the rites. || 48 ||
Their wedding will take place in a magnificent palace, illuminated by various gem-studded lamps, adorned with garlands of various colored powders, and filled with the fragrance of various flowers. || 49 ||
This auspicious marriage will take place with the exchange of garlands. || 50 ||
The son, driven by passion, will be affected by a distortion, with a faint smile, a glance, and other signs. || 51 ||
Seeing this, his mother will hide herself to observe, fearing that her son might be tempted. || 52 ||
At that time, a thief named Vidyut Prabha, born to the queen Vimala Mata of the famous Podanapur city, ruled by Vidyut Raja, will arrive. || 53 ||
Vidyut Prabha, a great sinner and the number one thief, will be fierce and sharp among the warriors. || 53 ||
He will leave the city with five hundred warriors, angered by his elder brother, and will become known as Vidyut Chor. || 54 ||
Knowing the art of becoming invisible, opening locks, and other techniques, he will enter the city as a thief. || 55 ||
He will use the teachings of the thief's scriptures, the rituals of tantra and mantra, to steal the wealth from the house of Seth Arhadass. || 56 ||
Entering the house, he will see the Jain woman, the mother of Jambhu Kumar, awake at night, and will ask her why she is awake. || 57 ||
The Jain woman will reply, "This is my only son, and he has decided to go to the forest for penance tomorrow morning. I am worried about him." || 58 ||
"If you are wise, and can save him from this penance, I will give you all the wealth you desire." || 59 ||
Hearing this, the thief will agree to do it. || 60 ||

Page #561:
---------------------------
The sixty-seventh chapter is about the condemnation of the thief who entered the palace with the intention of stealing. He was filled with self-doubt and reached the vicinity of the Jamboo Kumar. The Jamboo Kumar, seated amidst the maidens, appeared like a bird in a cage, a deer caught in a net, an elephant stuck in deep mud, or a lion trapped in an iron cage. He was deeply detached, and his worldly desires were nearing their end. Seeing him, the wise thief, Vidyuccora, would tell the story of the camel. 

He would say, "O Kumar! Listen, once upon a time, a camel wandered freely, grazing on sweet grass near a mountain. The grass where he was grazing was sweet because it was mixed with the nectar that fell from above. The camel ate this sweet grass once and resolved to eat only such grass. With this resolve, he desired the falling nectar and became detached from the enjoyment of other grasses. He remained there, and eventually, he died of hunger. Similarly, O Kumar! You, too, desire the pleasures of heaven, neglecting the pleasures present before you. You are also devoid of wisdom, like that camel."

Hearing the story of the camel told by Vidyuccora, the Jamboo Kumar, the head of the Vaishyas, would respond to the thief with a clear illustration. He would say, "A man was suffering from a severe fever. He drank water from rivers, lakes, and ponds repeatedly, but his thirst did not quench. Would a drop of water on the tip of a blade of grass quench his thirst? Similarly, this being has enjoyed the pleasures of heaven for a long time, yet he is not satisfied. Will he be satisfied with the fleeting pleasures of this world, like the ears of an elephant?"

Hearing the words of Jamboo Kumar, Vidyuccora would say, "In a forest, there lived a hunter named Chanda. He made a large tree his base, sat on it, drew his bow to his cheek, and killed an elephant. At that moment, a snake emerged from a hollow in the tree and bit him. The ignorant hunter killed the snake as well. Thus, he killed both the elephant and the snake, and died himself. Then, the

Page #562:
---------------------------
534
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, a greedy jackal, thinking to eat the strings of a bow, cut them, but in doing so, his throat was cut by the bow's end, and he died in vain. Thus, excessive greed should be abandoned. 

When the thief is silent, the wise Jambhukumar, reflecting, will speak a good word. 

A foolish traveler, while on his way, found a heap of precious jewels at a crossroads. He could have easily taken them, but for some reason, he left them and went on. Later, desiring to take them, he returned to the crossroads, but could he find the heap of jewels? No, he could not. Similarly, a man who, in the ocean of existence, finds a collection of rare jewels, but does not accept them, will he ever find them again? No, he will not. 

Keeping in mind the words spoken by Jambhukumar, the thief will tell another story, one that points out injustice. 

He will say, "A jackal, with a piece of meat in his mouth, was going into the water. Desiring to catch a fish that was playing there, he dropped the piece of meat and jumped into the water. The current of the water was strong, and he was swept away and drowned. After his death, the long-lived fish lived happily in the water. Thus, a fool, greedy like the jackal, is sure to perish." 

Hearing the thief's words, Jambhukumar, who is not troubled by anything, will say, "A sleepy merchant, intoxicated by the pleasure of sleep, slept in his house, where his precious jewels were kept. Thieves stole them, and he died in sorrow. Similarly, this being is attached to the small pleasures of the senses, and thieves in the form of passion are stealing his jewels of knowledge, vision, and character. When these jewels are stolen, this being is destroyed without a trace." 

In response, the thief will say, "A woman, angered by the harsh words of her mother-in-law, went to the foot of a tree, desiring to die. She was adorned with all kinds of ornaments, but she did not know how to hang herself, and her mind was greatly troubled." 

At that time, a wicked drummer named Suvarnadārak, desiring to take her ornaments, hid himself under the tree.

Page #563:
---------------------------
Shattsaptatitamam parva sthapayitva samaruhya svargalokharajanakah. Udandhanakrama tasyaa darshayan mrityuchoditah || 11 || Mrida patite bhumau sadyah kenapi hetuna. Rajapatavileebutakanthah prodvattralochana || 12 || Prapat pretadhivasam tavikshyasau durmuterbhayat. Aayaagahamatas tadvalllobho heyo mahams tvaya || 93 || Ityasya so'pi vagjaalamasodhoudaharishyati. Kila dhurtavitam vikshya lalitaangaabhidhamakam || 9 || Kasyacirasa mahaadevi jaata madanavihalaa. Tadvitaanayanopayanirannara niyuktaya || 95|| Taddhaacya guptamaaneetah pathiko'ntah praveshtah. Saha tena mahaadevi ramamaana yathepsitam || 16 || Ahobhir bahubhirata shuddhah shuddhantarakshhibhih. Tanmukhashadaduraacaare raajnaa'pi vidite sati || 17 || Jaaraapanayanopaayamaajnaaptaah 'paricaarikaa. Avaskaragrham neetva sa tam tatraakshipan khalam || 18 || Sa durganddhena tajjantubhishcha duhkhamavaapnuvan. Atraiva narakavaasamaaptavan paapapaakataH || 19 || Tadvad alpasukhasya'bhilaashine narakadishu. Bhavanti dustara'paaradhora duhkhaa gatishviti || 20 || Punah kumara evaikam prapancaad gaditaa sa tam. Yena samsaaranirvaago jaayate sahasaa sataam || 101 ||

The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:

Having established the seventy-sixth chapter, the creator of the celestial world ascended. Showing the method of hanging, he was impelled by death. || 11 || The drum fell to the ground for some reason. With his throat choked by the noose, his eyes bulged out. || 12 || Seeing him in the abode of the dead, she was afraid of the evil death. Your great greed for that is to be given up. || 93 || He too will not be able to bear the net of his speech, as they say, seeing the cunning libertine. || 9 || A queen was made mad by Cupid for some time. Engaged continuously in the means of bringing that libertine. || 95 || That one, brought secretly, the traveler was admitted inside. The queen was enjoying with him as desired. || 16 || Purified by many pure internal guards, even when the king's misconduct was known. || 17 || The attendants were ordered to remove the lover. Taking him to the latrine, she threw that wicked one there. || 18 || Suffering from the foul smell and the insects, he obtained misery. Here itself, he attained the abode of hell due to the ripening of sins. || 19 || Likewise, for one desirous of little happiness, there are insurmountable, boundless and terrible sufferings in the hells, etc. || 20 || Again, the prince will narrate another story from the world, by which the detachment from the cycle of rebirth arises suddenly for the virtuous. || 101 ||

Page #564:
---------------------------
536
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, a bee, attracted by the sweetness of honey, was consumed by it. Thinking that the service of the honey was happiness, it lived on it. 1.1
How can a wise man, who is attached to the objects of the senses, be like that? Let all beings abandon attachment and perform austerities. 1.2
Hearing these words, his mother, the daughters, and the thief, all became detached from the world, the body, and its pleasures. 1.8
Then, dispelling the darkness, the sun, shining brightly, will, like a preceptor, initiate the prince with love. 1.9
With his rays, he will touch the prince's mind and make it happy. Like a great endeavor in austerity, he will rise above the peak of the mountain, dispelling all darkness. ... 1.10
He will be like an unjust king, for just as an unjust king is the cause of all suffering, so too will the sun be the cause of all suffering. Just as an unjust king is harsh, that is, he levies heavy taxes, so too will the sun be harsh, that is, he will have hot rays. Just as an unjust king is cruel, that is, he is merciless, so too will the sun be cruel, that is, he will be extremely hot. Just as an unjust king is unstable, that is, he is not constant, sometimes he is satisfied and sometimes he is dissatisfied, so too will the sun be unstable, that is, he will not remain in one place. And just as an unjust king destroys the earth, so too will the sun destroy the blue lotuses. 1.11
Or, he will be like a victorious king, for just as a victorious king has a constant rise, that is, his rise continues to increase, so too will the sun have a constant rise, that is, he will rise every day. Just as a victorious king is the lord of the wise, that is, he is the master of the learned, so too will the sun be the lord of the wise, that is, he will be the master of the planets. Just as a victorious king's kingdom, that is, his country, is pure, free from enemies, and undivided, so too will the sun's kingdom, that is, his disc, be pure and undivided. Just as a victorious king is pleased with Lakshmi, so too will the sun be pleased with the lotuses, that is, he will cause them to bloom. And just as a victorious king has increasing pride, so too will the sun have increasing heat, that is, his heat will continue to increase. 1.12
Knowing that Jambhukumar has become detached from the world, his brothers, the Kunika king, his eighteen armies, and the unclothed gods will rejoice. And all of them will perform his initiation ceremony with garlands and water. 1.13-114
Wearing the appropriate attire for the occasion, he will ride in a palanquin made by the gods, and with great splendor, he will ascend the peak of the great mountain. 1.15

Page #565:
---------------------------
The 66th chapter is entered, worshipped by the great sages. It is circumambulated with devotion and saluted as per the rules. ||16|| With many excellent stories born from descriptions, along with the Vidyutchar thief and his five hundred servants, he will take the vow of restraint. ||17|| With a calm mind, he will take the vow of restraint in the presence of Sudharma Ganadhar, and will attain Kaivalya after twelve years, in the great Gotama-rate. ||118|| Sudharma will be a Kevali, and Jambū will be a Shruta-kevali. After twelve years, they will both attain liberation. ||119|| Sudharma will be the last one to attain knowledge, and Jambū will be the next. His disciple will be named Bhava, a great one, who will live for forty years. ||120|| He will wander the earth, teaching Dharma. Hearing this, Anavrita, sitting there, was filled with joy. ||121|| "This is the greatness of my lineage, something amazing. It is not seen anywhere else," he said, and performed a play of joy. ||122|| Seeing this, King Shrenika asked with humility, "How is this Anavrita related to Jambū?" Gautama, with humility, answered clearly. ||123|| "In the lineage of Jambū, there was a merchant named Dharmapriya. He had a son named Arhadās, born to his wife, Guṇadevi." ||124|| "He was arrogant due to wealth and youth, and did not value his father's teachings. He became unrestrained in the seven vices, due to the influence of karma. Due to his evil deeds, he suffered a downfall, and then he regretted it. He thought, 'I did not listen to my father's teachings,' and his mind calmed down." ||125-126|| "Then, he accumulated some merit and became a Vyantara deva named Anavrita. In this very life, he attained right faith." ||127|| When Gautama finished speaking, King Shrenika asked another question. "O Bhagavan, where did this Vidyumali come from? What merit did he perform in his previous life, because his radiance does not diminish even in his last days?" Gautama, with a compassionate mind, answered. ||128-129|| "In the past, in this Jambudvipa, in the Videha region, in the country of Pushkalavati, there was a city called Vitashoka. There, a king named Mahapada ruled. His queen..." ||130||

Page #566:
---------------------------
538
Returning from the Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana, he came back again, confused on all sides. With the fragrance of flowers and other auspicious materials, he was overwhelmed. || 132 || Seeing the people coming together, he asked his son, the minister's son, in amazement, "What is this?" || 133 || The son of the minister, the ocean of wisdom, said, "Listen, son, I will tell you. The Muni Indra, the Shruta Kevali, known as Sagaradatta, is famous for his radiant knowledge gained through penance. || 134 || He has entered the city for Parana after a month of fasting. The wealthy merchant, Samasamridha, has given him food with devotion, according to the rules, and received five wonders. || 135 || The Muni, the beautiful garden dweller, is being worshipped and honored by the citizens with great devotion. || 136 || Hearing this, the prince asked again, "How did Sagaradatta get his name, various riches, penance, and knowledge of the scriptures?" || 137 || The minister's son, following what he had heard, said, "In the land of Pushkalavati, there is a city called Pundarikani. Its king was Vajradanta, the Chakravarti, who conquered the entire earth with his chakra. || 138 || His queen, Yashodhara, was pregnant and gave birth to a son. Following the birth of the son, she went with great splendor to the confluence of the Sita and the ocean. || 139 || Reaching the great gate, she entered the ocean, the abode of aquatic creatures, and obtained a son who would attain liberation. || 140 || Because he was born in the ocean, his family named him Sagaradatta. || 141 || When he reached his youth, one day he was watching a play on the roof of his palace with his family. At that time, a servant named Anukul said, "O prince, look at this wonder! This cloud is as beautiful as Mount Mandara. || 142 || Filled with joy, the prince turned his eyes upwards to see the beautiful sight, but the cloud disappeared. Seeing it disappear, the prince thought, "Just as this cloud disappeared, 
1 विविधीस्तपः भुती ग० । विविधीश्वरो भुती ख•। विविषीश्च स भुतीः इति
।

Page #567:
---------------------------
The Sixty-seventh Chapter

This thunder-like (world) destroys life and other things. Thus, the one who has the knowledge of the yoga of the destruction of the world, became free from it. || 146 ||

He who had met his father, having reached the ocean of nectar, was situated in the beautiful garden, the leader of the Dharma Tirtha. || 147 ||

Having heard the Dharma, he was determined in all his existence. He renounced his family and took the vow of restraint with many others. || 148 ||

Having received the mind-turning (power) and attained the two-fold wealth, he wandered through the countries and came here to the land of the true Dharma. || 149 ||

Hearing this, he himself became immediately aware. Going to the Muni-Ishvara, he praised him and then drank the nectar of Dharma. || 150 ||

Seeing you, O Bhagavan, great affection arose in me. For what reason should I tell you? He asked and said. || 151 ||

In this island, in the Bharat Kshetra, in the Magadha country, there was a village called Vriddha. In it, there was a Vaishya named Rashtrakoota. He had two sons by his wife Revati. One was Bhagadatta and the other was Bhavadeva. || 152 ||

The elder one, Bhagadatta, took the vow of restraint from the Muni-Ishvara, Susthita. || 153 ||

Having obtained the Guru named Susthita, he, with humility, wandered through various countries and came to his birthplace. || 154 ||

Then, all his relatives came together with joy and, circumambulating the Muni, were ready to worship him. || 155 ||

In that village, there was a householder named Durmarshana. His wife's name was Nagavasu. They had a daughter named Nagashri. They gave her to Bhavadeva, the younger brother of Bhagadatta Muni-Ishvara, according to the proper procedure. || 156 ||

Hearing of the arrival of his elder brother, Bhavadeva was very happy. He also went to him and, with humility, bowed down repeatedly and sat there. At that time, the results of the Muni-Ishvara's teachings were very evident in him. || 157-158 ||

Having explained the true nature of Dharma and the ugliness of the world, Bhagadatta Muni-Ishvara took his younger brother Bhavadeva's hand and said to him in private, "You should take the vow of restraint." || 159 ||

In response, Bhavadeva said, "I will do what you have said after taking leave of Nagashri." || 160 ||

Hearing this, the Muni-Ishvara said, "How can this soul, trapped in the bonds of wife, etc., do good for itself?" || 161 ||

Page #568:
---------------------------
46
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, abandon that delusion, even Bhavadeva followed suit. He was persuaded by his elder brother and thus he decided to take initiation. ||12|| Leading him to the presence of his guru, Bhagadatta, to cut off his worldly attachments, he initiated him into the path of liberation. This is how the brotherhood of the righteous is. ||13|| Having become a dravya-samyami, he spent twelve years with his gurus. Then, accompanied by other ascetics, he went alone to his birthplace, Vridhaprama. He went to the Ganini, Suvrata, and asked, "Mother, is there a Nagashri in this city?" ||14-15|| Understanding his intention, the Ganini replied, "O Muni, I do not know her story well." Thus, feigning indifference, the Ganini, to stabilize the dravya-lingi muni in his vows, began to tell him the following story from another Aryika, Gunavati. ||16-17|| She said, "There was a Vaishya named Sarvasamruddha. He had a son, Daruka, who was pure of heart. One day, his mother said to him, 'Eat the leftovers from our Seth.' Thus, she forced him to eat the leftover food. He ate it, but feeling disgusted, he vomited it all up. His mother took all the vomit in a bronze plate. When Daruka became hungry and asked his mother for food, she placed the same vomit in front of him. Though Daruka was suffering from hunger, he did not eat his own vomit. If even the son of a slave did not eat his own vomit, how can a muni desire what he has abandoned?" ||18-21|| "Now I will tell you another story. Listen with a steady mind," said the Ganini, beginning another story. She said, "There was a king named Narapala. Out of curiosity, he kept a dog. He always fed it with sweet food and adorned it with golden ornaments. When he went out for forest excursions and other activities, he would carry the dog in a golden palanquin, being a fool. One day, while sitting in the palanquin, the low-born dog saw the excrement of a child. Seeing it, he jumped on it, desiring to obtain it. Seeing this, the king beat him with a stick and drove him away." ||22-25|| Similarly, the muni, who is worthy of worship by all, by abandoning his desires, again faces defeat. ||26||

Page #569:
---------------------------
Sixty-seventh Parva

541.  A certain misguided traveler, seeking fragrant fruits and flowers, strayed from the right path.  He entered a dense forest, and there he encountered a hungry, ferocious tiger, eager to kill.  Frightened, the foolish traveler ran and fell into a deep, terrifying well.  There, due to the arising of evil karma, he suffered from cold, fever, and phlegm, the three bodily humors.  He was afflicted with impediments in speech, sight, hearing, and movement.  He was also troubled by snakes and other creatures.  Unable to find a way out of the well, he despaired.

179.  By chance, a noble physician came by.  Seeing the traveler's plight, his heart was filled with compassion.  With great care, he devised a way to rescue him from the well.  He used mantras and medicines to heal him.  His limbs regained their strength, his eyes opened to see even the finest details, his ears became sharp enough to hear everything clearly, and his tongue was able to speak freely.

182.  Having done all this, the noble physician guided the traveler towards the city of Sarvaramani, for those with pure intentions always help others.

184.  But the foolish traveler, once again, became attached to worldly pleasures.  He lost his way and fell back into the same well.  Similarly, beings trapped in the well of samsara, due to the five karmic poisons of false belief, etc., suffer from deafness, blindness, and other ailments.  They are tormented by hunger, thirst, and other afflictions.  Seeing their plight, the compassionate Guru, the physician of true knowledge, skilled in the teachings of Dharma, rescues them from the well of samsara.  He then administers the medicine of right faith, opening their eyes of right vision, healing their ears of right knowledge, extending their legs of right conduct, and revealing their tongue of compassion.  He guides them towards liberation and heaven by teaching them the five types of scriptures.  These Gurus, like physicians, are wise and noble.

185-190.  Many beings, due to the arising of evil karma, are destined for a long journey through samsara.  Just as those who dwell near a fragrant, blooming champa tree are enveloped in its fragrance, those who...

Page #570:
---------------------------
News Chronicle
542
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, those who are influenced by kshaya, vishaya, aarammbh and worldly knowledge, and are attached to the six tastes related to the tongue and senses, are called Kusheel with evil intentions. || 19 || Those who are greedy for prohibited substances and emotions are called Sansakt. Those whose knowledge, character, etc. are declining are called Avasann, and those who stay away from good conduct are called Mrigachari. All these people fall repeatedly into the deep well of the world, because they do not give up the great delusion. Hearing all these things from the Ganini, Bhavadev Muni also attained peace of mind. Knowing this, the Ganini called Nagashri, whose condition was deteriorating due to her bad deeds, and showed her to Bhavadev. Seeing her, Bhavadev remembered the world, cursed himself, condemned himself, and again took up restraint, and at the end of his life, he took refuge in the four forms of worship in succession, along with his elder brother Bhagadatt Muni. After death, he became a Samanik Dev in the Bayabhadar Vimana of the Mahendra heaven, with a lifespan of seven oceans, along with his brother. || 194-196 || From there, I became the elder brother Bhagadatt's being, and you became the younger brother Bhavadev's being. Thus, hearing the words of the Muni, Shiv Kumar became detached. || 200 || He was ready to take initiation, but his parents stopped him. Although this Kumar, who had attained self-knowledge, went to the city, he decided that I will not take Prasook food. Hearing this, the king announced in the assembly that whoever feeds the Kumar, I will give him whatever he wants. Knowing this announcement of the king, a Shravak named Dridhavarma, who was the refuge of seven Dharmakshetras, went to the Kumar and said, "O Kumar! These family members are your enemies, who are experts in destroying their own and others' souls, and are the cause of sin, therefore, O Bhadra! Do not destroy your emotional restraint, I will serve you by Prasook food. It is rare for someone who is not free from the attachment of family members, i.e., who is trapped in their affection, to be inclined towards restraint. Thus, he spoke these beneficial words. The Kumar also accepted his words and ate food with a neutral, non-acidic taste. || 201-206 || Although he was in the presence of beautiful women, he 
1 Tatprarthitam Kha. | 2 Sevaam | 3 Rasayana Gha., Ka., Ma. |

Page #571:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

543.  In the night of the waning moon, he (Vidyunmali) manifested himself, having renounced life at the end of the Kalpa, in the name of Brijendra. ||208|| He was a god, adorned with garlands, and his body illuminated the banks of the river of desires. ||209|| Thus, in response to the questions of the Shreniks, Gautam said: ||210|| The women of this Vidyunmali are the daughters of the Sethas, and they are the four wives of Jambunatha. They will attain liberation with him, having attained the final heaven. ||211|| Having gone to the abode of Sagaradatta, they will attain the bliss of the mind. ||212|| Jambunatha will also be liberated at the time of his renunciation of the household. ||213|| All this was spoken with joy by the leader of the army. ||214|| Hearing this, the king of Magadha, Shrenik, bowed to the Jina. ||215|| For who are there who do not respect the one who teaches the path of liberation? ||216|| Then, on another day, having reached the Bhagavan, the destroyer of the world, he worshipped and bowed to him, whose brilliance was like the sun. ||217|| Seeing the moon in the constellation of stars, he asked the Ganadhar, "What deed did he do in his previous birth to attain such a form?" ||218|| The Ganadhar replied, "In this Magadha country, there is a city called Supratidhaya. ||219|| King Ujayasen was its protector. In that city, there lived a Seth named Sagaradatta. ||220|| His wife was Prabhakari. They had two sons, Nagadatta being the elder and Kuberadatta, who was equal to Kuber in wealth. ||221|| Except for Nagadatta, all the inhabitants of his house became Shravakas. ||222|| For a man devoid of merit does not obtain even a good gem in the ocean. ||223|| 

Thus, their time passed happily. Once, in the Priyankara garden on the mountain called Dharnibhusan, there was a Muni named Sagaraseena. ||224|| Hearing this, King Jayasen and others went and worshipped him, and asked him about the true nature of Dharma. ||225|| The Muni replied, "Those who have attained the eye of right faith, have been blessed with merit through giving, worship, and nourishment. ||226||

Page #572:
---------------------------
544
The Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, speaks of the happiness of heaven and liberation through restraint. Those who hold false views, through charity and other merits, attain the happiness of heaven. ||225||
Again, those who hold false views, due to the influence of their peaceful consequences, attain the appropriate Dharma, either by themselves or through others. ||224||
Those who are fit to attain liberation will be freed from the cycle of births and deaths. Others, however, are deeply attached to worldly pleasures and are afflicted by the poison of false views. ||225||
Those who engage in violence, falsehood, stealing, adultery, initiation, and attachment, accumulate sin and fall into the well of suffering, which is the cycle of births and deaths. ||226||
Hearing these words, many people embraced Dharma. Then, the merchant Sagardatta asked the Muni about the duration of his life. ||227||
The Muni replied, "Twenty days." Hearing this, the merchant entered the city with great joy. ||228||
He performed the Ashtaahnika puja and handed over his position to his eldest son. Then, after consulting with all his relatives, he took the vow of renunciation for twenty-two days, and at the end of his life, he attained the divine state. ||229||
On another day, Nagadatta, driven by insatiable greed, called Kubera Datta and asked him with malice, "Did your father show you the most valuable treasure?" ||230||
Understanding that he was consumed by intense greed, Kubera Datta replied, "Did our father have any separate treasure that we were unaware of? He has gone to heaven after taking the vow of renunciation according to the scriptures. Therefore, it is a great sin to slander him. Brother, this is neither something you should say nor something I should hear." ||231-232||
Thus, Kubera Datta dispelled all the evil thoughts of Nagadatta. He divided all the wealth, built many temples and shrines, performed various types of Jin worship, and gave four types of charity to the three types of recipients with devotion. ||233-234||
In this way, the two brothers, filled with mutual affection, spent their time happily. One day, Kubera Datta, along with his wife, wealth, and friends, offered a powerful meal to the Muni Sagarsen. After offering the meal, he bowed down and asked the Muni, "Will we both ever have sons?" ||235-236||
"If not, then we will both take the vow of Jain initiation." ||237||
The Muni replied, "You, young man, are destined for great merit and will have a son who will be a great benefactor." ||238||

Page #573:
---------------------------
## The 57th Chapter

**545**  The two, hearing these words, their minds filled with desire, said to the revered one, "This is a small offering from us." **239**  "When he is born, we will dedicate him to you," they said happily. **240**  They spent a few months in joy, and after a few months, they were blessed with a son. **241**  "This son will please the entire world with his virtues," they thought, and with great joy, they named him Pritikar. **242**  Five years passed after the birth of their son, and the Muni Raja returned to this city from Dhanyapur. Kubera Datta and Dhanamitra went to greet him and said, "O Muni Raja! This is your offering, please accept him." **243**  They gave the child to him, and the Muni Raja took the child and returned to Dhanyapur. **244**  There, he taught him all the scriptures for ten years. Pritikar was a near-liberated soul and eager to take vows, but his teachers stopped him, saying, "O Arya! This is not the time for you to take vows." **245**  Pritikar accepted their words and bowed to them with devotion. Then, he went to his parents. **246**  He taught the scriptures he had learned to the righteous people on the path. Dressed as a student, he went to all his relatives. **247**  When the king learned of his arrival, he welcomed him with great respect. Pritikar, considering himself extraordinary because of his lineage, thought, **248**  "I will not take a wife until I have earned a great deal of wealth." **249**  One day, some people from the city were preparing to embark on a sea voyage. Pritikar also wanted to go with them and asked his brothers and relatives about it. **250**  When they agreed, Pritikar, with his excellent intellect, went to his teacher to pay his respects. The teacher wrote a letter filled with words that conveyed his intended meaning and gave it to him. **251**  Pritikar took the letter and tied it to his ear with great respect. He then looked for auspicious signs and, with his friends, boarded the ship and set sail. **252**  After a few days, the virtuous man reached the city of Bhutilaka, surrounded by a mountain range.

Page #574:
---------------------------
546
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
When those in front of the city were leaving, seeing the sounds of conch shells, trumpets, etc., the best of the merchants, fearing, said: ||253|| "Who will go to this city and find out and return here?" Hearing this, the pleasing young man said: ||254|| "I am capable of this task." Then, tied with a rope made of cinnamon bark, he was lowered down by them. ||255|| Looking around in amazement, he entered the city. After seeing the Jain temple, he circumambulated it and offered his respects. ||256|| Then, going forward, he saw many dead people, their bodies marked by the blows of weapons. He saw a girl coming out of a lake and going towards her house. ||257|| Following her, he reached the courtyard of her house. "Where have you come from, O noble one?" she said, offering him a seat. ||258|| Standing on that seat, he asked her, "Tell me, why has this city become like this?" She replied, "There is no time to tell you this. O noble one, go from here quickly, for there is great danger here." ||259|| Hearing this, the fearless one said, "Does the one who will cause me fear have a thousand arms?" ||260|| The girl, whose fear had subsided, spoke in detail. "In the north of this Vijayardha mountain, there is a city called Alaka, whose rulers were three brothers. Haribal was the eldest, Mahaasen was younger than him, and Bhootilka was the youngest. ||262|| Haribal's queen, Dhaarini, had a son named Bheemka, and his other queen, Shrimati, had another son named Hiranyavarma. ||264|| Mahaasen's wife, Sundari, had two sons, Ugrasen and Varsen, and I am their sister, Vasundhara. ||265|| Once, my father went out to roam the earth. Seeing this beautiful and vast city, he desired to claim it. ||266|| Earlier, some Vyantara Devatas lived here. My father, along with his brother Bhootilka, defeated them in battle and conquered this place. ||267||

Page #575:
---------------------------
The Sixty-seventh Chapter

He, who had accumulated great merit, spent some time here, being served with pleasure by the kings who resided here. || 268 ||

Here, the learned king Haribala, having conquered his senses, became detached from the world, fearing the cycle of birth and death. He taught his younger son, Hiranyavarma, the scriptures and gave the kingdom of Alakapuri to his elder son, Bhimaka. || 269 ||

Desiring to eradicate his karmas, he took initiation from the Charana Muni, Vipulamati, and by the fire of white meditation, he burnt the eight karmas that had afflicted him. He attained the eighth earth, the desired one, adorned with eight virtues (attained liberation). || 270-271 ||

Meanwhile, Bhimaka, ruling the kingdom, deceitfully took away the knowledge of Hiranyavarma. Not only that, he was also ready to kill him. || 272 ||

Knowing this, Hiranyavarma fled to the Sammed Shikhar mountain. Bhimaka, in his anger, pursued him there, but he could not enter the mountain due to the presence of the Tirthankara and the mountain itself being a Tirtha. Therefore, he returned to the city. || 273-274 ||

After that, Hiranyavarma went to his uncle, Maharaja Mahasena. || 274 ||

Hearing this, Bhimaka sent a letter to Maharaja Mahasena, saying, "You are a venerable person, worthy of our respect. Therefore, please expel our enemy, Hiranyavarma, from there." Maharaja Mahasena replied, "I cannot expel him." || 275 ||

Knowing this, Bhimaka came here with a desire to fight. "This wicked man is a great sinner," thinking this, our father defeated Bhimaka in battle and bound his two legs with chains. || 276 ||

Later, our father, becoming calm, thought, "It is not right for me to do this." Thinking this, he released him, pacified him with kind words, and made peace between him and Hiranyavarma. He gave him the kingdom as before and sent him away. || 277-278 ||

Bhimaka, though he left at that time, did not give up his hatred for Hiranyavarma because of this insult. As a result, that wicked Bhimaka, having mastered the Rakshasi Vidya, killed Hiranyavarma, my father, and my brothers, destroyed this city, and is now coming to take me. || 279-280 ||

Hearing all this, Kumar Pritiṅkara, filled with wonder, looked at the sword lying on the bed and said, "This sword has very auspicious signs. The one who holds this sword cannot be defeated even by Indra. Did your father give this sword to you?" || 281 ||

Page #576:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the one who holds this sword, even Indra cannot defeat him. Thinking this, why did your father fight with anyone?  ||22||  Thus, the girl did not even speak of it in her dreams. Then, the joyful prince, taking the sword in his hand, ||283||  stood inside the tower, fearless, to kill the terrible one, his body hidden, his stature elevated, holding the divine sword. ||284||  At that moment, the terrible one, approaching and looking around, sent his knowledge, seeing the wicked one, kill him. ||285||  This one is a Samyagdristi, far removed from the seven fears, a great hero with a perfect body, I am not capable of killing him. ||286||  Thus, fearing, she wandered around him, from there. Seeing this, the terrible one, realizing that the knowledge was powerless, dismissed it. ||287||  Saying, "You are useless," she also disappeared. The terrible one, himself wanting to kill him, ||288||  the prince also arrived, threatening terribly.  Having protected himself from the attack, he also freed himself from the sword with his life. ||289||  Then, seeing the prince coming after killing the wicked one, the girl came forward and said, "O noble one, you have done a great deed." ||290||  Saying this, she seated him on a golden throne in the courtyard of the royal palace, and anointed him with water-filled golden pots, cleansed with water. ||291||  Placing a crown shining with jewels on his beautiful head, and all the other special ornaments in their proper places, ||292||  adorned with the waving of chowries, the prince, looking at the beautiful one, ||293||  asked, "What is this?"  In front of the mistress of the house, she said, "I am the mistress of this city, I give you my kingdom, with the royal insignia, ||294||  placing a garland of jewels around your neck, I am overwhelmed with love for you."  Hearing this, the prince replied, ||295||  "I cannot accept you without the permission of my parents, because I have already made such a vow. ||296||  If you insist, your wish will be fulfilled when you meet my parents."  The girl accepted the prince's words and gave him a lot of wealth, and by means of a long rope, she lowered him onto the ship. ||297||

Page #577:
---------------------------
The Sixty-seventh Chapter
546
The girl came to the shore with the young man. The young man, out of joy, also shook the rope. || 298 || Seeing the rope shaking, Nagadatta came out, pulled the girl and her belongings into the ship and was very pleased. || 299 || When it was time for the ship to leave, the young man went back to the city to bring the girl's forgotten ornaments. || 300 || Nagadatta, pulling the rope, said, "I have got a lot of wealth with this girl, which I will enjoy till my death. I am fulfilled. May the young man, like Pritikar, be well." Saying this, he left with the other merchants who had found a loophole. || 301-302 || Knowing Nagadatta's intention, the girl remained silent and vowed that she would not speak to anyone on the ship except Pritikar. || 303 || Nagadatta also told people that the girl was mute and appointed her to guard the wealth with gestures of love. || 304 || Nagadatta reached his city in due course. Upon reaching, the Seth asked him, "Pritikar also went to the city of Bhootilka with you, why didn't he come?" In reply, Nagadatta said, "I don't know anything." Taking the ornaments, Pritikar came to the seashore. || 305-306 || But the wicked Nagadatta had already left, deceiving him. Not seeing the ship, he returned to the city, worried. || 307 || Filled with worry, Pritikar saw a Jain temple there and went inside. He worshipped the Lord with flowers and other offerings, according to the rituals. Then he started praising the Lord as follows: || 308 ||
"O Jinendra! Just as the darkness of the night is destroyed by the lamp for a man with open eyes, so too, my sins have been destroyed by merely seeing you. || 309 || O Jinendra! You, the pure soul, know the worldly beings who are affected by karma, and the inanimate matter that is different from beings. You are free from karma, so how can you be compared to anyone? || 310 || O Lord! Although you are devoid of sensory knowledge, you have alone defeated the famous philosophers like Sankhya, who have sensory knowledge. This is amazing. || 311 || O God! This three worlds, without beginning and end, are asleep, enveloped in the darkness of ignorance. You alone are awake, eternally seeing the whole universe. || 312 ||

Page #578:
---------------------------
550
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
The pure and auspicious Agama of the Jina is the cause of knowledge of the truth for the disciple. It is the light for the discerning. || 313 ||
Thus, the joyful Kumar, who had attained pure faith, recited the praise he had composed and contemplated the state of the world created by karma. || 314 ||
Then, somewhat troubled, he fell asleep in the abhishechanashaala (bathing room). At that time, two Yaksha deities, Nanda and Mahananda, arrived to pay homage to the Jina temple. || 315 ||
Seeing the letter tied to the ear of the joyful Kumar, they took it. The letter said, "This joyful Kumar is your co-religionist brother, so you should take him to the city of Supratistha with great wealth. This is my task for you both." Thus, the two deities learned from the letter the message of their Guru and all the news of their previous birth. || 316-318 ||
Previously, in the city of Varanasi, there lived a merchant named Dhandeva. We were his two sons, Shantava and Ramana, born to his wife, Jinadatta. || 319 ||
There, we learned all the scriptures from texts and explanations. But, being proficient in the art of thievery, we became eager to steal the wealth of others. || 320 ||
Our father was unable to stop us from this act of theft. Therefore, he renounced all possessions and took the difficult path of becoming a monk. || 321 ||
Meanwhile, on the mountain called Shikhi-Bhudhara, near the city of Dhanyapura, due to the greatness of the Muni, even the wicked creatures like lions and tigers did not harm anyone. Hearing this from the people, we went to that mountain. There, we saw the Muni, Sagaraseena, who was an extremely austere ascetic. We listened to his teachings about Jainism and renounced the consumption of honey, meat, etc. || 322-324 ||
Later, when that Muni went to the city of Supratistha, we died due to the attacks of lions and attained this heavenly realm. || 325 ||
Knowing that all this happened due to the effect of the vows we had taken from the Guru, we went to him, worshipped him, and asked, "What is our dwelling place?" || 326 ||
The Muni replied, "In the days to come, whatever is destined to happen will happen." || 327 ||
You alone are awake in it, and you are seeing the entire world. || 312 ||
O Jina! Just as light is the cause of knowledge of objects for a human being with four senses, so your pure and auspicious Agama is the cause of knowledge of the truth for the disciples. || 313 ||

Page #579:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

551. Both of them asked, "What is your command for us?" In response, the Muni said, "My work will be done after a few days, and you both should know it well and do it with respect." Saying this, he opened the letter and showed it to them. || 326-328 ||

After this, the Devas, with much wealth, placed the Pritikar on the Vimana and quickly brought him to the mountain called Dharanibhushan, near the well-established city. It is right, for what does the rise of merit not do? Hearing of the Pritikar's arrival, the king, his relatives, and the citizens of the city came to meet him with great joy and their respective glories. The Devas entrusted the Pritikar Kumar to them and then went to their own abode. || 329-331 ||

Entering the city, the Pritikar, with appropriate jewels, worshipped the king. The king, in turn, honored him with a suitable place and respect, satisfying him. || 332 ||

Then, on another day, the Pritikar Kumar's elder mother, Priyamitra, was going to adorn her daughter-in-law with a collection of jeweled ornaments for the occasion of her son's wedding. To see her, the mute girl herself came to the road and, seeing the collection of ornaments, indicated to everyone with her fingers that this collection of ornaments was hers. Then, the girl stood there, stopping Priyamitra who was seated in the chariot. In response, Priyamitra, seated in the chariot, made everyone understand that this girl was mad. || 333-336 ||

Then, those who knew about mantras, tantras, and other methods, used them properly and, after examining her, clearly declared that she was neither mad nor possessed by a ghost. || 337 ||

Hearing this, the Pritikar Kumar sent a secret letter to the girl, saying, "O Kumari! Do not fear at all. I will be present there with the king." Seeing the letter and believing it, the girl went to the king with great joy. The king, wanting to know the story of her ornaments, called the Dharma-Adhikaris and appointed them. || 338-340 ||

The king seated the Vasundhara girl in the enclosure nearby and asked the Kumar Pritikar, "Do you know anything about her?" || 341 ||

In response, the Kumar told him what he knew and then explained to the king that he did not know the rest.

Page #580:
---------------------------
## The Great Purana, Uttara Purana

The king, disguised in clothes, worshipped the goddess with incense and other offerings. He asked, "O Goddess, tell me exactly what you saw." || 343 ||

The goddess, in response, revealed to the king all the wicked deeds of Nagadatta. Hearing this and carefully considering it, the king was filled with anger towards the wicked Nagadatta. He said, "This sinner has committed patricide and also betrayed his master." Having said this, he confiscated all of Nagadatta's wealth and attempted to punish him. || 344-345 ||

However, the prince, Preetikara, intervened, saying, "This is not right for you."  Soothing the king with his kindness, he offered his own daughter, Prithvisundari, the daughter Vasundhara, and thirty-two other daughters of the Vaishyas to the king in a proper ceremony. || 346-347 ||

He also gave him the previous wealth, the place, and half of his kingdom. Indeed, those who have performed good deeds in their previous lives, receive wealth on their own. || 348 ||

Thus, the extremely happy and ever-growing Preetikara enjoyed the desired pleasures of life there for a long time. || 349 ||

One day, the Muni, Sagar Sena, attained liberation after renouncing the world and went to heaven. At that time, two Charanas, Riddhi-dharis, named Rijumati and Vipulamati, adorned with the ornaments of wisdom, arrived at the beautiful garden called Manohara. The merchant Preetikara went to them, praised them, and asked about the nature of Dharma. || 350-351 ||

Rijumati, one of the two Munis, said, "Dharma should be understood in two ways, based on the difference between householders and Munis. The Dharma of householders is of eleven types, based on the difference in Darshan-Pratima, Vrata-Pratima, etc. The Dharma of Munis, which destroys karma, is of ten types, based on the difference in Kshama, etc." || 352-353 ||

After hearing about the nature of Dharma, Preetikara asked the Muni about his previous births. In response, the Muni said, "Listen, I will tell you. Once, outside this city, the Muni Sagar Sena was practicing the Atapaana Yoga. Therefore, many people, including the king, went to pay their respects to him. They worshipped him with various offerings and came to the city with the sound of conch shells, trumpets, and other instruments. Hearing the sound of these instruments, a jackal thought, "I will go to that place and eat whatever is thrown away." || 354-356 ||

The Muni said, "This goddess knows." || 357 ||

Page #581:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

553

Seeing the jackal, the Muni understood that this being was destined for liberation and would soon attain it by taking a vow. Thinking this, the Muni addressed the jackal:

"You have become a jackal due to the fruits of your past sins. Even now, you are foolish and think of evil deeds even in the company of the virtuous. O noble one, refrain from this evil deed, which brings unbearable suffering. Take a vow and embrace a good outcome."

Hearing these words, the jackal was overjoyed, knowing that the Muni understood his thoughts. The Muni, knowing the jackal's intentions, said again:

"You, being greedy for flesh, are incapable of taking other vows. Therefore, take this excellent vow of abstaining from food at night. This is the provision for the afterlife, as the Muni's words are."

Hearing this with devotion, the jackal prostrated himself, agreed, and took the vow of abstaining from food at night. He also gave up alcohol, meat, and other such things.

From that time onwards, he ate only pure food like rice. He performed severe austerities for a long time.

One day, he ate dry food and became thirsty. At sunset, he desired to drink water. He entered a well through the steps, but seeing no light, he thought the sun had set and came out without drinking. Seeing the light outside, he went back into the well to drink. Thus, he went in and out of the well two or three times. Finally, the sun actually set.

The jackal, steadfast in his vow, endured the thirst and, with pure outcomes, died and was reborn as a son named Pritikar, beloved to the wife of Kubera Dutt Seth. He attained such wealth and prosperity due to the power of the vow.

Hearing this from the Muni, Pritikar was filled with fear and awe. He praised the greatness of the vow, bowed to the Muni, and returned home.

The Acharya says: Just as a poor man suffers greatly during a famine, so too does a man without vows in this world suffer for a long time and constantly experiences immense sorrow.

Page #582:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, it is said that people believe in a person who observes vows, while they are always suspicious of a person who does not. A person who observes vows is like a fruitful tree, while a person who does not is like a barren tree. 

A person who observes vows attains desired fruits in the next birth. Therefore, it is said that there is no brother greater than a person who observes vows, and no enemy greater than a person who does not. 

Everyone accepts the words of a person who observes vows, but no one listens to a person who does not. Even great deities cannot disrespect a person who observes vows. 

Even if a person who observes vows is young, elders greet him, but if an elder does not observe vows, people consider him as insignificant as a blade of grass. 

Vows are acquired through practice and destroyed through renunciation. In reality, renunciation is called a vow. Therefore, a virtuous person must observe vows. 

Observing vows leads to wealth, while not observing them never brings wealth. Therefore, a person who desires wealth should become a virtuous person with a detached mind. 

Even a small vow is the cause of heaven and liberation for this being. For those who want an example, the example of Pritikara can be given well. 

Those who have observed vows well in their previous births enjoy the fruits according to their desires in this birth. It is right because does any work happen without a cause? 

One who believes in the origin of work from a cause should consider dharma and papa as the cause of work in the form of happiness and sorrow. That is, one should believe that happiness comes from dharma and sorrow from papa. Those who believe the opposite are seen to get the opposite results. 

If he is not foolish, addicted, deserving of punishment, or an atheist, then who will say that there is something else besides dharma and papa as the cause of happiness and sorrow? 

Even a person who sees only the benefit and harm of this birth is called wise. Then, why should those who consider the benefit and harm of the future birth not be called very wise? That is, they should definitely be called wise. 

Considering this, a person with pure intellect should take the vow spoken by the Jinadeva and, showing effort, strive to attain the happiness of heaven and liberation. 

After that, Pritikara, who had a detached intellect, dedicated all his possessions to his son Priyangkara, the son of his wife Vasundhara, with a coronation ceremony, and with many servants and brothers, he went to the city of Rajagriha to see the Bhagavan.

Page #583:
---------------------------
## Chapter 67: The Essence of the Path to Liberation through Certainty and Conduct

**Verse 387:** The path to liberation is characterized by three aspects: right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct. It is through the strength of these that one attains liberation.

**Verse 388:** By destroying the karmas that cause harm, one attains the four infinite qualities. By destroying the karmas that do not cause harm, one attains the state of being one with the Supreme Self.

**Verse 389:** Thus, the king Shrenika, having heard the teachings of the Lord of the Ganas, was filled with joy and, bowing down, felt himself fulfilled.

**Verse 390:** On another occasion, the king Shrenika, who had embraced the right faith, approached the Lord of the Ganas with folded hands.

**Verse 391:** He inquired about the remaining time of the descending cycle and the entire duration of the ascending cycle.

**Verse 392:** The Lord of the Ganas, pleased with the assembly, spoke in a deep voice, his words radiating like the rays of his teeth.

**Verse 393:** He said, "When three years and eight and a half months remain until the end of the fourth time period, the Lord Mahavira will attain liberation."

**Verse 394:** The duration of the fifth time period, known as Dushama, is twenty-one thousand sagara years. In that time, humans will have a lifespan of one hundred years.

**Verse 395:** Their bodies will be a maximum of seven hands tall, their complexion will be rough, their appearance will be ugly, they will be constantly engaged in eating, and their minds will be attached to sensual pleasures.

**Verse 396:** Due to the influence of time, they will have many other flaws. For in that time, thousands of people who commit evil deeds will be born.

**Verse 397:** Due to the absence of kings with the qualities described in the scriptures, there will be a mixing of castes. After a thousand years of the Dushama time period, there will be a decline in dharma, and in the city of Pataliputra, a wicked son named Chaturmuka will be born to the queen Prithvisundari of king Shishupala. He will be the foremost among the wicked and will shake the earth.

**Verse 398:** He will be known as the Kalki king and will be born in the year of Magha.

**Verse 399:** His lifespan will be seventy years, and he will rule for forty years.

**Verse 400:** He will make the ninety-ninth group of heretics his servants and will rule over the entire earth.

**Verse 401:** Then, filled with the pride of his false teachings, the wicked Kalki will ask his ministers, "Tell me, are there still any heretics who are not under my control?"

Page #584:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, 
The ministers were asked by the wicked king, "Are the ascetics still disobeying my orders?" They replied, "O King, the Nirvrantha ascetics are still outside your command." 

The king then asked, "What are their customs?" The ministers replied, "Their hands are their vessels, they are without wealth, they have no desires, they are Digambara, having abandoned all coverings for the sake of protecting the vow of non-violence, they consider austerity as their means, and they take food only for the sustenance of their body, after one or two days of fasting, they only show their bodies during begging, and they do not beg, they desire to take food only according to the rules laid down in their scriptures, they look upon their killer and their protector with equal eyes, they endure hunger, thirst, and other afflictions, even when there is a reason for them, they do not desire anything that is not given to them by others, like snakes, they do not build a dwelling for themselves, they are devoted to knowledge and meditation, and they live in places where there is no human traffic, with the deer." Thus, the ministers, who were well-versed in the king's affairs, described what they had seen.

Hearing this, the king said, "I cannot tolerate their unrighteous conduct, therefore, let the first morsel of food that is given to them be taken as a tax from them."

Thus, the officials, at the king's command, would demand the first morsel from the ascetics, and the ascetics would stand silently without eating. Seeing this, the arrogant officials went to the king and said, "We don't know what has happened, the Digambara ascetics are not willing to obey your orders."

Hearing the officials, the king's eyes turned red with anger, and his lips began to tremble. Then, he himself tried to snatch the morsel.

At that time, an Asura, who was a pure Samyagdarshi, could not bear this, and therefore, he killed the king. It is right, because a powerful man does not tolerate injustice.

This four-faced king, after dying, went to the first earth, called Ratnapraba, where he lived for an age equal to an ocean, and suffered for a long time due to the passion of greed.

Powerful people cannot tolerate the destruction of Dharma, and Dharma cannot be established without some transgression (violence), therefore, the Samyagdarshi Asura, who was unjust,

Page #585:
---------------------------
## The 67th Chapter

**The Dharma is the Mother, Father, Protector, and Enhancer**

Dharma is the mother, father, protector, and enhancer of all beings. Dharma leads them to the pure and unshakeable state of liberation. (417)

The destruction of Dharma leads to the destruction of the righteous. Therefore, the righteous men prevent the wicked from harming Dharma. The world is protected by such righteous men. (418)

Dharma is propagated through eight means: knowledge of the causes, practice of austerities, pleasing the minds of people through Dharma teachings, shattering the pride of other religions, composing beautiful poetry that captivates the hearts of kings, displaying courage, and spreading the teachings of the Jains. (419-420)

Those who propagate Dharma by fulfilling the desires of those who seek them are like the Cintamani gem. They are rare, worthy of worship, and blessed. (421)

The Jain scriptures say that liberation is in the hands of those who are interested in propagating the Jain teachings. (422)

He who propagates the Jain teachings is a grammarian, a logician, a theologian, and a great ascetic. What is the use of these titles if he does not propagate the teachings? (423)

Just as the sun illuminates the world, the Jain teachings are illuminated by those who propagate them. The righteous ones hold their feet on their heads. (424)

Just as the ocean is the source of gems and the Malaya mountain is the source of sandalwood, the propagator of the Jain teachings is the source of Dharma. (425)

Just as a king removes thorns from his kingdom, those who constantly remove thorns from Dharma and work tirelessly for its propagation are the holders of Lakshmi (wealth and prosperity). (426)

Acharya Gunabhadra says that in my mind, which is like a stage filled with flowers of joy, the great actor, the propagation of the true Dharma taught by the Jinas, dances eternally. (427)

Then, the wise son of Kalki, Ajitanjaya, along with his wife Balana, will seek refuge in the Devata. He will accept the precious jewel of right faith. Seeing the greatness of the Jina Dharma, the wicked heretics will abandon their arrogance. The Dharma taught by the Jinas will flourish again for some time. (428-430)

Page #586:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, after twenty Kalpas have passed in a thousand years, the last Kalpa, Jalamanthan, will be extremely sinful. He will be the last king, meaning there will be no king after him. At that time, the last Muni will be Viraangaj, a disciple of Chandracharya. The last Aryika will be Sarvashri, the last Shravak will be Agnil, and the last Shravika with excellent vows will be Falguseena. 

All of them will reside in Ayodhya and will be the last righteous souls of the Dushama Kalpa. When eight months remain in the last Kalpa, on the last day of the dark fortnight of Kartik month, in the morning, when the Swaati Nakshatra rises, Viraangaj Muni, Agnil Shravak, Sarvashri Aryika, and Falguseena Shravika will all leave their bodies and lifespan, and due to the influence of righteous conduct, they will go to the first heaven. 

At midday, the king will perish, and in the evening, the fire will be extinguished. At that time, the Dharma that is the root cause of the six karmas, family, country, and wealth, will be completely destroyed. All of them will meet their destruction together when their respective causes are fulfilled. 

After that, the Ati-Dushama Kalpa will arrive. At its beginning, humans will have a lifespan of twenty years, be three and a half hands tall, constantly eat, be sinful, and come from and go to either hell or the animal realm. Due to the lack of cotton and clothes, for some years, they will wear leaves and other things, but at the end of the sixth Kalpa, they will all become naked and, like monkeys, will be miserable and eat fruits and other things. 

Due to the fault of time, the clouds will rain very little for twenty-one thousand years. This is only right, because time cannot be violated. The intelligence, strength, body, and lifespan of humans will gradually decline. At the end of this Kalpa, humans will have a lifespan of sixteen years and be one hand tall. 

At that time, only the unstable and inauspicious qualities of karma will bear fruit. The people of that time will be black, their bodies will be rough, they will be unfortunate, have bad voices, be wicked, difficult to look at, have ugly forms, be weak, have sparse teeth, their chests, cheeks, and eyes will be sunken, and their noses will be flat. They will abandon all good conduct and be tormented by hunger, thirst, etc.

Page #587:
---------------------------
The sixty-seventh parsha

556. Those who are constantly afflicted by hunger, thirst, and other ailments, will be diseased and unable to find any remedy. They will only experience the taste of suffering. || 446 ||

As time passes, when the final time of the Atiduhsama period arrives, all the water will dry up, and just like the body, it will be destroyed. || 447 ||

The earth will become extremely dry and cracked in many places. The fear of destruction will cause all the trees to wither and become discolored. || 448 ||

In this way, the destruction of all living beings will occur. A few humans will take refuge on the platforms of the Ganga, Sindhu rivers, and the Vijayadha mountain. They will survive by eating fish, frogs, turtles, and crabs that are born in the mouths of rivers. Some wicked, poor, and low-born creatures from seventy-two families will hide in small burrows. || 449-450 ||

Then, for seven days at a time, clouds will rain down sweet, tasteless, sharp, rough, hot, poisonous, and salty water. After this, the unevenness (high and low) of the earth will disappear, and the land will become uniform, like the Chitra earth. This will mark the end of the Apsarpini period. || 451-453 ||

After this, the Atiduhsama period of the Utsarpini period will begin. It will also last for twenty-one thousand years. During this time, the population will increase.

Page #588:
---------------------------
## The Uttara Purana of the Mahapurana

**Verse 455:** For seven days without rest, the Ksheera-jati (milk-kind) clouds will rain water and milk, causing the earth to shed its dryness.

**Verse 456:** From this, the earth will gradually acquire the qualities of color, etc. Then, for seven days, the Amrita-jati (nectar-kind) clouds will rain nectar.

**Verse 457:** As a result, medicinal plants, trees, shrubs, and grass will flourish as before.

**Verse 458:** After this, the Rasa-adhika (rich in taste) clouds will rain the six tastes, giving rise to them. The humans who had previously taken refuge in burrows will emerge and live happily, utilizing these tastes.

**Verse 459:** As time progresses, the bodies of living beings will gradually grow, overcoming their previous decline.

**Verse 460:** Then, the Dushama-kal (period of hardship) will begin. During this time, the lifespan of humans will be twenty years, and their height will be three and a half hands.

**Verse 461:** This period will also last for twenty-one thousand years. During this time, sixteen Kulakaras (family leaders) with pure intellect will be born in succession.

**Verse 462:** The first Kulakara will have a body slightly less than four hands tall, while the last one will have a body seven hands tall.

**Verse 463:** The first Kulakara will be named Kanaka, the second Kanakaprabha, the third Kanakraja, the fourth Kanakadhwaja, the fifth Kanakapungava, the sixth Nalina, the seventh Nalina-prabha, the eighth Nalinaraja, the ninth Nalindhwaja, the tenth Nalina-pungava, the eleventh Padma, the twelfth Padmaprabha, the thirteenth Padmaraja, the fourteenth Padmadhwaja, the fifteenth Padmapungava, and the sixteenth Mahapadma.

**Verse 464:** These Kulakaras will be distinguished by their wisdom and strength.

**Verse 465:** During their time, the earth, water, grains, etc., will flourish in a prosperous manner.

**Verse 466:** Humans will abandon immoral conduct and consume appropriate food at the right time. They will cultivate friendship, modesty, truthfulness, compassion, self-control, contentment, humility, forgiveness, and moderation in attachment and aversion.

**Verse 467:** They will follow virtuous conduct and cook their food over fire.

**Verse 468:** All this will happen during the second period. Then, the third period will begin. During this time, humans will have bodies seven hands tall and a lifespan of one hundred and twenty years.

**Verse 469:** Then, during this period, the Tirthankaras will be born. The names of the first seven Tirthankaras are: 1. Shrenika, 2. Suparshva, 3. Udank, 4. Prosthil, 5. Katpru, 6. Kshatriya, 7. Shreshthi, 8. Shankha.

Page #589:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

**472.** Proshthila, Katpra, Kshatriya, Shreshthisamjhak, the seventh is Shankha, Nandana, and Sunandavak.

**473.** Shashank, Sevak, Premak, and Atorana, Raivat, Vasudeva, and Baldeva after that.

**474.** Bhagal, Yangali, Dvaipayana, Kanak, Padanta, Narada, Charupada, and Satyakiputra.

**475.** These twenty-three, along with their followers, are playful. There are also twenty-four other Tirthankaras in this period.

**476.** The first Tirthankara will be from the sixteenth lineage, with a lifespan of one hundred years and a body seven arani tall. The last Tirthankara will have a lifespan of one crore years in the past and a body five hundred dhanush tall.

**477.** The first Tirthankara among them will be Mahapadma. After him, there will be twenty-three other Tirthankaras:

**478.** Suredev, Suparshva, Swayamprabha, Sarvatmabhuta, Devputra, Kulputra, Udank, Proshthila, Jayakirti, Munisuvrata, Aranath, Apapa, Nishkashaya, Vipula, Nirmala, Chitragupta, Samadhigupta, Swayambhu, Anivarti, Vijay, Vimala, Devapal, and Anantvirya.

**479.** All the Indra gods will forever worship the lotus feet of all these Tirthankaras. In this third period, there will also be twelve Chakravartis who will be the holders of excellent Lakshmi.

**480.** Their names will be: Bharat, the second is Dirghadant, the third is Muktadant, the fourth is Gudhadant, the fifth is Shrishen, the sixth is Shribhuti, the seventh is Shrikant, the eighth is Padma, the ninth is Mahapadma, the tenth is Vichitravahan, the eleventh is Vimala Vahan, and the twelfth is Arishta Sen, who is endowed with all wealth.

**481.** There will also be nine Balabhadra in this period. Their names in order are: Chandra, Mahachandra, Chakradhara, Harichandra, Singhchandra, Varachandra, Purnachandra, Suchandra, and Shrichandra, who is worshipped by Narayana.

**482.** There will also be nine Narayana in this period. Their names are: Nandi, Nandimitra, Nandishena, Nandibhuti, the famous Bal, Mahabal, Atibal, Triprishtha, and the ninth is Vibhu, named Dwiprishtha.

**483.** There will also be nine Pratinarayana, enemies of these Narayana. Their names should be known from other scriptures.

**484.** After that, after this period, there will be a period of Sushama-Dushshama. In the beginning, there will be five hundred years of human lifespan.

**485.** "Nishkashaya, Vipula, Chitragupta, Samadhigupta" is also a reading, but here only one Tirthankara name is heard.

Page #590:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana states that in some of the Sadhika Purva Kavyayu, the state of the Jghanya Bhogabhumis is similar to that of the Aryas.  || 491 ||  Then, in the fifth time period, the state of the Madhyama Bhogabhumis will prevail. In the sixth time period, the state of the Varya Bhogabhumis will be known. || 492 ||  Similarly, the state of the remaining nine Karmabhumis will be the same. Thus, the state of the Kalpa is described as being the same in the past, present, and future. || 493 ||  This is the way the Kalpa is to be understood, as spoken by the Jinas. In all the Videhakshetras, the height of humans is five hundred Dhanus and their lifespan is one crore years. || 494 ||  The lifespan of humans is considered to be one crore years. Among them, the Tirthankaras, Chakravartis, Balabhadra, and Narayana are considered to be the most numerous. || 495 ||  They are remembered as being numerous, with a hundred and sixty each. If they are fewer, then they are twenty each. || 496 ||  The total number of beings born in all the Bhumis is one hundred and seventy.  Beings from all four gatis are born there. || 497 ||  The five gatis go to their respective destinations, controlled by their own conduct.  All beings born in the Bhogabhumis originate from the Karmabhumis. || 498 ||  Humans and sentient animals go to the Upapada.  Beings born in the Bhogabhumis, at the end of their lives, are reborn in the first and second heavens or in the three categories of Bhavanavasis. || 499 ||  It is a rule that all humans and sentient animals born in the Bhogabhumis are destined to become Devas.  Humans born in the Bhogabhumis are the best, while those born in the Karmabhumis are of three types, according to their specific activities:  Uttama, Madhyama, and Jghanya.  The Shalaka Purushas, Kamadeva, and the Vidyadharas are Devas who are worshipped by the good. They are called divine humans and are said to be the humans of the sixth time period.  Apart from them, there are those with one leg, those without language, those with ears like a shankha, those who use their ears as clothing and bedding, those with faces like horses, lions, and buffaloes, and others who are difficult to look at. || 500-503 ||

Page #591:
---------------------------
The Sixty-seventh Chapter
563
'Krolvyāghramukhāścaivamulūkamukhanāmākāḥ | Śākhāmṛgamukhā matsya-mukhāḥ kālamukhāstathā || 504 || Gomeṣameghavaktrāśca vidyudādarshavaktrakāḥ | Hastivaktrā kumānushya-jā lāgalaviṣāṇinaḥ || 505 ||  Ete ca nīcakā smādantaradvīpavāsinaḥ | Mlecchkhaṇḍe pu sarveṣu vijayārtheṣu ca sthitiḥ || 506 || Tīrthakṛtkālavad dvihāsavat karmabhamiṣu | Idañca śreṇikapraśnādindrabhūtigana-ādhipaḥ || 507 ||  ityāha vacanābhiṣu nirastāntaḥ temastatiḥ | Ihāntyatīrthanātho'pi vihṛtya viṣayān bahūn || 508 ||  kramāt pāvapurṁ prāpya manohara-vanāntare | Bahūnāṁ sarasāṁ madhye mahāmaṇiśilātale || 509 ||  sthitvā dinadvayaṁ vītavihāro vṛddha nirjaraḥ | Kṛṣṇakārtikapākṣasya caturdaśyāṁ niśātyaye || 510 ||  svātiyoge tṛtīye'd dhyānaparāyaṇaḥ | Kṛtatriyogasaṁrodhaḥ samuccinnākṛyaṁ śritaḥ || 511 ||  hatāghāticanuṣkaḥ sannaśarīro guṇātmakaḥ | Gantā munisaha-srena nirvāṇaṁ sarvavāgchhitam || 512 ||  tadeva puruṣārthasya paryanto'nantasaukhyakṛt | Atha sarve'pi devendrā vahvīndramukuta-sfurat || 513 ||  hutāśanaśikhānyastataddehā mohavi-dviṣam | Abhyarcya gandhamālyādidnyadivyai-ryavidhi || 514 ||  vandiṣyante bhavātītamayairvandāravaḥ stavaiḥ | Vīranivṛtisamprāsadinā evāstaghātikaḥ || 515 ||  bhaviṣyāmyahamap-yudyadkevalajñānalocanāḥ | Bhavyānāṁ dharmadeśena vihṛtya viṣayāṁstatah || 516 ||  gatvā vipulaśabdādigirī prāpsyāmi nirvṛtim | Manirvṛti-dine labdhā sudharmaḥ śruta-pāragaḥ || 517 ||  lokālokāvalokai-kālokamantyavilocanam | Tannirvāṇakṣaṇe bhāvī jambūnāmācakevalaḥ || 518 ||  antyāḥ kevalīnām asminbharate sa prarūpyate | Nandī munistaḥ śreṣṭho nandimīnno'parājitaḥ || 519 ||  Lambe kāna vāle, kharagōśake samāna kāna vāle, ghoḍe ādike samāna kāna vāle, aśvamukh, simhamukh, dekhane ke ayōgya mahiṣamukha, kōlamukh (śūkaramukha), vyāghramukh, ulūkamukh, vānaramukha, matsya-mukh, kālamukh, gōmukh, meṣamukha, meghamukh, vidyunmukh, ādarśamukha, hastimukh, pūñch vāle,
aura sīng vāle ye kubhōgabhūmike manushya bhī nīca manushya kahalāte hain. Ye sab antīpōṁ men rahte hain. Sab mlecchkhaṇḍōṁ aura vijayādha parvatōṁ kī sthiti tīrthakarōṁ ke samay ke samāna hotī hai aura vṛddhi hās sada karmabhūmiōṁ men hī rahtā hai. Is prakār śreṇik rājā ke praśna ke anusār indrabhūti gaṇadhar ne vacan rūpī kiraṇōṁ ke dvārā antaḥkaraṇ ke andhakār samūha kō naṣṭa karte hue yah hāl kahā. Unhōṁ ne yah bhī kahā ki bhagavān mahāvīr bhī bahut se desōṁ men vihār karenge || 467-508 || Antam men ve pāvapur nagar men pahūñchenge vahāṁ ke manohara nām ke van ke bhitara anek sarōvarōṁ ke bīc men maṇimī śilā par virājamān hōnge. Vihār chōḍakar nirjarā kō baḍhāte hue ve dō din tak vahāṁ virājamān rahenge aura fir kārtīkkṛṣṇa caturdaśī ke din rātri ke antim samay svātinakṣatra men atiśaya dedip-yamāna tīsa-re śukladhyān men tatpar hōnge. Tadanan-tara tīnōṁ yōgōṁ kā nirodhakar samuccinnākṛyāpratipātī nām ka caturtha śukladhyān kō dhāraṇ kar cārōṁ aghātiyā kō kā kṣaya kar denge aura śarīrarahita kevalaguṇ rūp hōkar ek hazār muniōṁ ke sāth sab ke dvārā vāñchanyamōkṣapad prāpt karenge. 509-512 || Vahī un kā, ananta sukha kō karne vāla sabse baḍā puruṣārtha hōgā-un ke puruṣārtha kī vahī antim sīmā hōgī. Tadanan-tara indrādi sab dev āvenge aura agnīndrakumār ke mukuṭ se prajvalit hone vāli agnī kī śikhā par bhagavān mahāvīr svāmī kā śarīr rakkhenge. Svarg se lāye hue gandha, mālā ādi uttamōttam padārthōṁ ke dvārā mōha ke śatru bhūt un tīrthankar b

Page #592:
---------------------------
564
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the fourth is Govardhana, and another is the great ascetic, Bhadrabahu. They will all attain perfect purity in succession, being full of various Naya, diverse meanings, and complete knowledge of the scriptures. || 520 ||

After them will come Vishakhaarya, Prosthila, Kshatriya, Jaya, Nagasen, Siddhartha, Dhriti-shena, Vijay, Buddhila, Ganga-deva, and the wise Dharma-sena, in succession. || 521 ||

These eleven will be skilled in explaining the twelve Angas, and will be holders of the ten previous scriptures. || 522 ||

These eleven will be like Kalpa-vriksha for the glorious ones, and will illuminate the Jain Dharma. After them will come Nakshatra, Jayapala, Pandu, Dhruva-sena, and Kansarya, who will be knowledgeable in the eleven Angas. || 523 ||

After them will come Subhadra, Yasho-bhadra, the highly intelligent Yasho-bahu, and the fourth, Loha-acharya, who will be knowledgeable in the Achara-anga. || 524 ||

This tradition of these ascetics, who are full of knowledge and penance, will be propagated by the scriptures, which are pure and destroy sins, and which were uttered from the lotus mouth of the Jina. || 525 ||

After them, other ascetics like Jina-sena and Vira-sena, who possess great powers, will propagate a part of the knowledge of the scriptures. This part of the knowledge of the scriptures will continue until the end of the last time period, called Dushama. || 526 ||

Bharata, Sagar, the praiseworthy Satyaviry, the king Mitra-bhavana, the radiant Mitra-virya like the sun, Dharma-virya, the generous Maghava, the wise Buddhi-virya, Simandhara, Tri-prishtha, Swayambhu, Purushottama, Purusha-pundarika, the praiseworthy Satyadatta, Kunala, the protector of the earth, Narayana, the lord of men, Subhauma, Sarvabhauma, Ajita-jaya, Vijay, Ugra-sena, Maha-sena, and you, who will attain the position of the Jina, say to the king Shrenika, "O Shrenika! All these men are glorious, the best among those who ask questions about Dharma, and they are constantly serving the lotus feet of the twenty-four Tirthankaras." || 527 ||

The soul of Mahavira Swami was first a Bhil named Pururava, then he became a deva in the first heaven, then he became the son of Bharata, Marichi, then he became a deva in the Brahma heaven, then he became a Brahmin named Jatil. || 528 ||

Then he became a deva in the Saudharma heaven, then he became a Brahmin named Pushyamitra, then he became a Brahmin named Agnisama. || 529 ||

Then he became a deva in the Sanatkumara heaven, then he became a Brahmin named Agnimitra, then he became a Brahmin named Ubhadravaja in the Marun-mahindra heaven. || 530 ||

Page #593:
---------------------------
The 77th Tirthankara, after being a human in the Maheendra Kalpa, fell from there and spent countless years in the Narakas and the Trasa-sthavara yonis. || 537 || After wandering, he emerged from there and became a Brahmin named Sthavara. Then, in the fourth Kalpa, he became the deva Vishvanandi, and fell from there. || 538 || Then, he became the deva Tri-sprusht-vak in the Maha-shukra Kalpa, and fell from there into the seventh Naraka. From there, he became the deva Gaja-vidvisha. || 539 || From there, he became the deva Simha in the Adima Naraka, and became pure in his Dharma. Then, in the Saudharma Kalpa, he became the deva Simhaketu, the best of the devas. || 540 || Then, he became the king of the Vidyadharas named Kanakojjvala. Then, in the seventh Kalpa, he became the deva Harishena, and then the king. || 541 || Then, he became the deva Priyamitra in the Maha-shukra Kalpa, and then a Chakravarti. Then, in the Sahasrar Kalpa, he became the deva Surya-prabha. || 542 || From there, he became the king Nanda, born in the Pushpottara Vimana of the Achyuta Indra. Then, falling from there, he became the Jinesvara Vardhamana. || 543 || May the Lord, who has attained the five great auspiciousnesses and the supreme wealth of liberation, bestow all auspiciousness upon Gunabhadra and all those who are superior in qualities. || 544 ||

Thus, the assembly and the king of Magadha, Shrenika, were both filled with great joy, nourished by the nectar of the words of the Saraswati, the goddess of learning, adorned in the mouth of Gautama Swami, sweet with the taste of good stories and enjoyed with devotion. || 545 ||

I take you, O Sri Vardhamana, the Jina who is always increasing in wealth, on the path of praise. You, who have conquered even the last Tirthankara, have made the Dharma-tirtha vast even in this Kali Yuga. || 546 ||

Page #594:
---------------------------
566
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana

To please the praiseworthy, people beg,
But this is not your nature, you are free from delusion.
I do not seek anything by praising you, O Lord,
My only desire is to praise the praiseworthy, the Jina. || 547 ||

Those whose knowledge is devoid of objects,
Are not worthy of praise by those who seek their own good.
You, the Arhan, are the knower of all things,
And the speaker of them, therefore you are worthy of praise by those who seek their own good. || 548 ||

You do not give the fruit of praise,
Yet the one who praises you receives great and pure benefits without asking.
O Jina, why should I not praise you?
I am filled with fear of misery and desire for the highest fruit. || 549 ||

Who in this world gives even a blade of grass without a reason?
You, the Jina, give liberation without any reason,
And yet you are considered the first among the wise,
This is a great wonder. || 550 ||

Many people have given away all their wealth,
And made others rich with their selfless and stable wealth.
But you, the Jina, give only words,
And yet wise people consider you the greatest giver. || 551 ||

Page #595:
---------------------------
## Sixty-seventh

**552.** How can your teachings, which are opposed to both intellect and effort, and the attainment of victory, and happiness, and the enjoyment of all worldly objects, not pierce the ears of those whose intellect and effort are only for the attainment of victory, and whose happiness is the continuous enjoyment of all worldly objects?

**553.** The virtue that you have preached is desirable because it is the means of attaining ultimate liberation through knowledge, etc., and is fit to be performed by the worthy souls. The virtue that grants all the happiness of the gods is not true virtue because it gives bondage, entangles one in worldly objects, and destroys the desired goal (liberation).

**554.** O Jinendra! Your body, etc., in the assembly are not futile because the best disciples, hearing your words and seeing you directly, attain supreme bliss in this very life. This is right because the main fruit among all fruits is to benefit others.

**555.** O Jinendra! The karma, such as name, etc., which destroys the characteristics of knowledge, etc., in your soul, can it destroy your usefulness? No, it cannot. O Jinendra! Because of the existence of karma in the soul, those who consider you to be unliberated, why don't they also consider that the liberated Lord, who is without a body, is also not liberated because of the absence of continuous upward movement? Meaning: Although name, etc., karma exists in the Arhat state, it is not capable of doing anything because the power of delusion is absent. Therefore, their state of liberation is the only thing to be considered.

**567.** O Lord! The gods, such as the Ganadharas, etc., call you as having a beginning, without an end, without a beginning, with an end, without beginning and end, with sin, without sin, unhappy, happy, and without both happiness and unhappiness. Therefore, those who are ignorant of the principles cannot know you - you are unknowable to them. Meaning: The liberated state of the soul, which manifests, does not exist beforehand. Therefore, you are with a beginning in relation to the liberated state. And the liberated state, once manifested, never perishes. Therefore, you are without an end. Your worldly state is without a beginning. Therefore, you are without a beginning in relation to it. And when karma is destroyed, the worldly state ends. Therefore, you are with an end.

Page #596:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana states that you, O Lord, are both happy and unhappy, and beyond both. Therefore, you are inaccessible to those who do not understand the Nayas.  

There are two types of states of the soul: those arising from conjunction and those that are inherent. The states arising from conjunction are destroyed when the conjunction is destroyed. The state of the soul in which knowledge, etc., are inherent, is called the ultimate liberation. But this path is difficult for other philosophers who are far from your words.

O Lord, you grant liberation without any inner limitations by destroying the endless bondage of karma. This is not to mention that your ability to protect all beings, even without the motivation of affection, etc., is sufficient to prove your perfection.

O Lord, is your knowledge not filled with curiosity to see all things? Is your eloquence not capable of describing infinite things? Are you not capable of achieving wealth in the form of self-interest, while being indifferent to the interests of others? And are you not the only one worthy of worship among the virtuous?

O Lord, the extent of your infinite power, which spreads to see the entire universe, can never be reached. Yet, it is surprising that the virtuous declare you to be the happiest of the happy. Is this their devotion or their true knowledge?

Page #597:
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Seventh Chapter

566. Your efforts are solely for the liberation of the blessed souls, O Jinendra, and you have no desire for any fruit. Therefore, you alone are the one who quenches the world with the rain of the nectar of your words, being the friend without any reason. || 561 ||

562. This living being is known by the qualities of its manifested use, and the four destructive karmas are the ones that destroy that use. By destroying those destructive karmas, your complete characteristic of use has manifested. Therefore, O Jinendra, tell us, how can you not be called a Siddha with such a characteristic of the self? || 562 ||

563. O Bhagavan, I admit that your qualities are not ordinary, but it is surprising that you are not seen directly even with those extraordinary qualities. When you are seen directly, that devotion arises, by which a great accumulation of merit occurs and great sins are destroyed. || 563 ||

564. O Deva, your firm right faith (Samyak Darshan) arose from the destruction of the deluding karma. Now, with the destruction of the knowledge-obscuring and perception-obscuring karmas, the supreme firm right faith has manifested. In firm right faith, there is the perfection of conduct, and in supreme firm right faith, there is the ability to know all things. Thus, you are worthy of worship, being complete in the qualities of faith, knowledge, and conduct. || 564 ||

565. O Bhagavan, you had already destroyed the army of the powerful destructive karmas. Now, the non-destructive karmas, like the water of a reservoir whose dam has broken, flow continuously and disappear. O Nath, in this way, you have attained the perfection of the three jewels of conviction through the three jewels of conduct, and you have become the one lord of the three worlds through the appropriate wheel of Dharma. || 565 ||

566. O Lord, who crushes the pride of Kamadeva, your body is free from defects, your speech is truthful, and your ears, eyes, and senses have attained their true nature.

Page #598:
---------------------------
570
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, you, who are free from attachment and know all, are quickly established in the minds of all. What is the true nature of this object? Is it eternal or momentary? Tell me, what is its nature? The Buddhas and others are like children in the womb, their knowledge is far from the knowledge of objects. 567
Your infinite fourfold nature is not the object of the Kapilas and others, let alone your natural excellences like being free from sweat. How can these Kapilas and others be considered realized souls? How can they be called "apt"? 568
O Lord, although you have destroyed the three Vedas, the sages call you the Supreme Person. Is it because of your association with the subtle body? Or because of the burning of the vine of delusion? Or because of the transformation of the qualities of perfection? Or because of the greatness of your qualities? 569
O Lord, although you have not yet destroyed the three bodies, the gross, the luminous, and the karmic, you are already a perfected being because of the manifestation of your infinite perfection, power, and unparalleled patience. O Lord, you are the master of those who walk on the path of truth, and you lead them to the state of the Supreme Self. 570

Page #599:
---------------------------
##  English Translation:

**571**

O Dev! Although you have an *audhayika* state, it is not a cause of bondage because you are free from delusion. Only a little bondage arises from the merit of your *satavedaniya* nature, which is obtained through the request of the yogas. But it cannot harm you in any way. Therefore, you are truly free from bondage.

**572**

O Bhagavan! The merit obtained by becoming a bee of your lotus feet has made this group of gods countable (honorable) and its Lakshmi has gone beyond number. This is why Indra, whose face is shining with the rays rising from his nails, is bowing his head and looking towards your feet.

**573**

O Jinendra! Your excellent body is filled with the ultimate limit of the first state. You are the only abode of the brilliance of pure knowledge, devoid of sequence and senses. Your profound divine sound has manifested, filled with certainty and conduct, and you are the master of all. Therefore, O Lord! The influence of your supreme state is very beautifully manifested.

**574**

O Bhagavan! Although your knowledge is all-pervasive, it is still fixed in its nature and is not the cause of any action. Your speech flows without desire, yet it is capable of benefiting even speechless beings (animals, etc.). Similarly, your movement and stay are also done by your own will, and it does not harm either yourself or others. O Dev! You reside in the plane of my pure knowledge-mirror, i.e., be the object of my knowledge.

Page #600:
---------------------------
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, O Veer! You have destroyed both the eloquence and power of the arrows of Kamadeva, therefore, the victory over the enemy of delusion is yours alone, not in those who are unjust. ||575|| May the Lord Veerajina, the worthy of worship by the world, always reside on my head, and O Ganadhar Deva! You too always reside in my heart, because you have spoken this first Anuyoge, which increases faith, with compassion and clear words, due to my good fortune. It is natural for such men to have such feelings. ||576|| Thus, the Magadha king Shrenik, who is destined for liberation in the future, who has accomplished his task, who bears the burden of Dharma, and who is filled with great joy, entered his city praising Shri Vardhaman Jinendra and Gautam Ganadhar. ||577|| Acharya Gunabhadra says that the number of this Purana should be understood as twenty thousand in the Anushtup Chanda, by those who explain, listen, and write. ||578|| Thus, in the collection of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana, composed by Bhagavad Gunabhadracharya, known as Aarsha, this 76th Parva, narrating the Purana of Shri Vardhaman Swami, is complete. ||76||

Page #601:
---------------------------
##  Praise

**1.**  Hail to the victorious Vardhamana, whose feet, like the moon, are kissed by the nails of the Indra, whose crowns are revealed by the touch of his feet. The Indras, intoxicated by the sport of wearing the half-moon on their heads, even scorned the great Shiva.

**2.** Just as there are many places for shining jewels in the ocean, so too, in the ocean of the Mula Sangh, there arose a lineage of heroes, like jewels.

**3.** In that lineage, the great Vira Sena Bhattaraka, who terrified all the elephants intoxicated by pride, shone brightly.

**4.** He, like the embodiment of knowledge and conduct, adorned himself to bestow grace upon his disciples.

**5.** It was a wonder to behold how the kings, humbled by his feet, adorned themselves with the radiance of his nails, like the moon.

**6.** The Siddhi Bhoopaddhati, though difficult in every verse, was easily understood by the monks, thanks to the commentary composed by Vira Sena Swami.

**7.** The wealth of words, like a lotus, emanating from his mouth, is as pure as fame, worthy of being heard, and constantly brings joy to all the wise. It is as if it has been established in this world for a long time, through the effort of spreading throughout the universe. This wealth of words, like a mighty river flowing from the Himalayas, completely washes away the dirt accumulated in the ears of the ignorant, from time immemorial.

**Note:** The commentary "Dhavala" written by Vira Sena Swami on the Shatkhandagama is like the wealth of words emanating from his lotus-like mouth. It is as pure as fame, worthy of being heard, and constantly brings joy to all the right-believers. Its influence is spread throughout the world, and it is established in this world like the boundary of the scriptures. Acharya Gunabhadra says that his Dhavala commentary completely washes away the dirt of ignorance from the ears of the listeners for a long time.

Page #602:
---------------------------
574
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Just as the sun shines brightly from the shores of Udayagiri, so too did the Muni Jinasena emerge from the great Vira Sena. || 8 ||
Whose rays, like the rays of his nails, spread out, and the dust from his lotus feet, like saffron, dimmed the brilliance of the newly set jewels in the crown of Amoghavarsha, the king. He remembered, "I am purified today." That glorious Jinasena, the venerable, the Lord, is the auspiciousness of the world. || 9 ||
He was proficient in the composition of verses and prose, he was quick to refute opposing arguments, he had a deep understanding of the essence of the Agamas, he was skilled in telling stories of merit, he could unravel the intricacies of scriptures, and he was a poet of the highest order. Possessing these qualities, he remained steadfast, free from blemish, even in the Kali Yuga. || 10 ||
Just as the moon has its own light, the sun its brilliance, and the crystal its clarity, so too did Jinasena possess Saraswati by nature. || 11 ||
Just as the sun and moon are the Dharma of the entire world, so too was the highly intelligent Dasaratha, the Dharma-brother of Jinasena. || 12 ||
Just as the sun illuminates all things with its pure rays, so too did he illuminate the entire world with the rays of his words. || 12 ||
Just as even children can quickly recognize the image of the sun reflected in a mirror, so too was the harmony of all the scriptures evident in the brilliant words of Jinasena. || 16 ||
He had crossed the ocean of the Siddhanta Shastra, his intellect had grown in brilliance, and he had attained universal knowledge. || 13 ||
Just as the flow of the Ganga River emerges from the Himalayas, or the divine sound of all the scriptures emerges from the omniscient God, or the sun shines brightly from the shores of Udayagiri, so too did the Muni Jinasena emerge from the great Vira Sena. || 7-8 ||
The rays of Jinasena's nails shone brightly, spreading out like a stream of light. In the midst of these rays, his lotus feet appeared, and the dust from those lotus feet, like saffron, dimmed the brilliance of the newly set jewels in the crown of King Amoghavarsha. He remembered, "I am purified today." Acharya Gunabhadra says that the feet of the venerable Lord Jinasena are auspicious for the world. || 6 ||

Page #603:
---------------------------
## Praise

The learned one, adorned with countless virtues, proficient in the knowledge of Nayas and Pramanas, was a renowned disciple of the illustrious Gunabhadra Suri. || 14 ||

This Punyatri (blessed soul) conquered the pride of auspiciousness, understanding that the pure-minded Tapashri (goddess of austerity) was sent by the goddess of liberation as a swift messenger, and she served Gunabhadra with great affection, being endowed with the wealth of great virtues. || 15 ||

The rays of his words, like the sun and moon, dispelled the darkness of ignorance that resided in the hearts of people, and he delighted both the Kuvalaya (moon) and the Kamal (sun), thus conquering the spread of both. || 16 ||

This great Purana, based on the prose composition narrated by the supreme poet, is an example of all meters and figures of speech, with subtle meanings and profound word formations. It has rejected other poems, is worthy of being heard, and is extremely beautiful, as it shatters the pride of false poets. This is what the Lord Jinesena, the author of the commentary on the Siddhanta text, and the one who nurtured his disciples for a long time, has said. || 17-18 ||

The part of the text that remained from the words of Lord Jinesena was collected in a concise form by Gunabhadra Suri, the possessor of a pure intellect, due to the request of the time and the fear of excessive length. || 20 ||

This great Purana is devoid of unnecessary descriptions, easily understandable, written with excellent script, beneficial to all beings, and worthy of worship. Let the Bhavyas (aspirants for liberation) filled with devotion read and listen to this great Purana. || 21 ||

May those Bhavyas who desire to escape the cycle of birth and death contemplate this text repeatedly. They are the ones who possess pure right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct, and who are destined for future liberation. || 22 ||

Peace, victory, welfare, prosperity, happiness, union, separation, revolution, and the accumulation of immense wealth. || 23 ||

Page #604:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

576
In the Mahapurana, the Uttara Purana, the knowledge of the cause and effect of bondage due to auspicious and inauspicious actions should be known. The existence of liberation should be understood, and the cause of liberation should be ascertained. || 24 ||
The origin of the three types of detachment, the increase of faith in Dharma, the destruction of countless negative qualities, and the cessation of the flow of inauspicious actions, || 25 ||
The complete stoppage of the flow of karmic impurities, the liberation from all actions, and the ultimate purity, which is called the Siddhi of the soul, are all explained. || 26 ||
This should be explained, listened to, contemplated, worshipped with joy, written, and shared by the devotees. || 27 ||
The Muni, Lokesena, the master of all scriptures, the poet with flawless verses, the chief disciple of Gunabhadracharya, || 28 ||
He sought help in this Purana, and his excellent Guru-vinaya was accepted by the virtuous. || 28 ||
Whose lofty elephants, having drunk the bitter water of the Ganga, which was stained by the confluence of their own mad-like river, were repeatedly quenched of their thirst. They rested repeatedly in the dense sandalwood forest of the Kumari mountain, which was gently swaying with the waves of the ocean and where the rays of the sun were extinguished. || 29 ||
Lakshmi did not find happiness in the ocean of milk because it was churned by the mountain, nor in the chest of Narayana because it was repeatedly struck by the breasts of the Gopis, nor in the lotus because its petals bloomed during the day by the rays of the sun but contracted at night. || 30 ||
Thus, Lakshmi, leaving these three places, found happiness for a long time in the abode of the great-hearted, whose chest was like a strong house, supported by arms like pillars, and adorned with garlands like arches. || 30 ||
1.  L. for Vasavasankochinah.

Page #605:
---------------------------
Praise:
577
King Akala-Varsha, who had destroyed all his enemies and was adorned with glorious fame, was protecting the entire earth. || 31 ||
He, who was like the moon in his brilliance, whose fame was like the sun, who had destroyed the darkness of his enemies, and who was the descendant of the great Mukula dynasty, was the king of the world, Lokaditya. || 32 ||
He was the descendant of the Chella flag, the son of Chella-Dhwaja, and the grandson of Chella-Ketan. He was the propagator of the Jain religion and was known for his vast and brilliant fame. || 33 ||
He was enjoying the entire kingdom of Vanavasa, free from all troubles, for a long time. He was known for his father's name and was the ruler of the great city of Vankapur. || 34 ||
In the year 820 of the Saka era, on the fifth day of the bright half of Shravana, on Thursday, when the moon was in the Ardra constellation, Saturn was in Gemini, Mars was in Sagittarius, Rahu was in Libra, the sun and Venus were in Cancer, and Jupiter was in Taurus, this Uttarapurana was completed. On that day, the Bhavyajiva performed its worship. Thus, this most excellent and auspicious Purana is victorious in the world. || 35-36 ||
As long as the earth, the sky, the moon, the sun, Mount Meru, and the divisions of the directions exist, this holy Mahapurana will remain in the words, minds, and ears of the virtuous. That is, virtuous people will discuss it in their words, contemplate it in their hearts, and listen to its story with their ears. || 37 ||
In this Mahapurana, there is Dharma Shastra, the path to liberation, poetry, and the biographies of the Tirthankaras. Or, the words that have come out of the lotus mouth of the poet king Jinasena, do not captivate the minds of anyone. || 38 ||

Page #606:
---------------------------
578
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
In the ancient Puraana, the Puraana Purusha did something great. Just as the great poets are not distracted in the discussions of poetry by the poet Shinaana, so too, the great poet Jinaseenaacharya is victorious. || 39 ||
He is praised by the poets, revered by the pure monks, worshipped by the noble ones. He is full of all virtues, a lion to conquer the wicked elephants, knowledgeable in all the scriptures, and worshipped by all the kings. || 40 ||
O friend, if your mind is delighted to hear the collection of verses spoken by all the great poets, then bring your ears close to hear this Puraana spoken by the lotus-mouth of the great poet Jinaseenaacharya. || 41 ||
Gunabhadraacharya is also victorious, worshipped by all the yogis, the foremost among all the great poets, worthy of being worshipped by the Acharyas. He has conquered the pleasures of love, his banner of fame flies in all directions, he is like an axe to destroy the tree of sin, and he is worshipped by all the kings. || 42 ||
Is there any dharma here? It is not appropriate to say that this is a great Puraana. It is a vast ocean of stories, a collection of narratives about men, and a collection of characters. || 38 ||
Who does not steal the hearts of all? That is, they steal the hearts of all. || 38 ||
The ancient Puraana Purusha, Bhagavan Aadinatha, has done something wonderful in this Puraana. In his presence, the poets are never without heart in the discussions of poetry. || 36 ||
May Jinaseenaacharya be victorious, who is praised by the poets, whose group of pure monks praise him, whose group of noble beings praise him, who is full of all virtues, who is like a lion to conquer the wicked elephants, who knows all the scriptures, and who is worshipped by all the kings. || 40 ||
O friend, if your mind is delighted to hear the collection of verses spoken by all the great poets, then bring your ears close to hear this Puraana spoken by the lotus-mouth of the great poet Jinaseenaacharya. || 41 ||
Gunabhadraacharya is also victorious, worshipped by all the yogis, the foremost among all the great poets, worthy of being worshipped by the Acharyas. He has conquered the pleasures of love, his banner of fame flies in all directions, he is like an axe to destroy the tree of sin, and he is worshipped by all the kings. || 42 ||
This great Puraana is not just a Puraana, it is a wonderful dharma shastra, its stories are worth listening to, it is a vast ocean of stories, a collection of narratives about men, and a collection of characters. || 38 ||
Who does not steal the hearts of all? That is, they steal the hearts of all. || 38 ||
The ancient Puraana Purusha, Bhagavan Aadinatha, has done something wonderful in this Puraana. In his presence, the poets are never without heart in the discussions of poetry. || 36 ||
1. The great poet Jinaseenaacharya, the great one, is the one who speaks the sweet, jewel-like words of the Puraana. And then, the words of Gunabhadraacharya are diverse, and all the great poets, like the wind-lions, are victorious. || M, K, G, Gh ||
2. The hundred worlds are not in the K, G, Gh, M books. ||

Page #607:
---------------------------
## Praise

**576**

Is there any poetic merit in this work?  Indeed, even poets are captivated by its words like bees drawn to lotus blossoms.  Who is this poet?  It is none other than the great Gunabhadracharya himself!  || 43 ||

Thus ends the 77th chapter, the description of the praise, in the collection of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya. || 77 ||

This explanation of the Trishattilakshana Purusha is captivating, a veritable ocean of character descriptions.  It possesses an extraordinary poetic quality, and poets are drawn to its words like bees to lotus blossoms.  Indeed, the author of this work, Shri Gunabhadracharya, is himself an extraordinary poet. || 4 ||

Thus ends the 77th chapter, the description of the praise, in the collection of the Trishattilakshana Mahapurana composed by the venerable Gunabhadracharya.

This ocean of Puranas is unfathomable, adorned with waves of meaning.  I consider Gunabhadra, the great poet, my refuge in all matters. ||

Paragrama is his birthplace,
Gallilal his father.
Pannalal, of limited intellect, am I,
Who composed this commentary with my limited understanding. ||

Completed in the afternoon of a Friday, in the bright fortnight of the month of Madhu,
In the year 84, known as the Vira year. ||

May those learned ones, the sources of virtue, be victorious!
By relying on their compassionate gaze, I have crossed this ocean of scriptures. ||

May those whose compassionate gaze has caused my verses to blossom like flowers,
Be worshipped by me, the group of scholars, with my head bowed in gratitude. ||

Those who are satiated by the nectar of his compassion,
Do not desire the nectar of the gods.
May the ocean of virtue, Gunaganesh,
Be a source of joy for the lords of wisdom. ||

Page #608:
---------------------------
Anukrama of the verses of the Uttarapurana, starting with the name:
24
6
122
64
129
[A] Ansavaripathopeta
Angam saptamamakhyeyam 195 Akampanadyabhupala
Angapratyangasansparsha Akampano'ndhavelakhya 468 Angaragam samalocya Akampishata sarve'pi 507 Angarago'ngalamasy
463 Akarodushanam ghigdik 487 Angaharaihsakaranah 170 Akashayamaanarambha- 180 Angangabahyasaadbhava- 473 Akaranasamudbhut
Anginon vata sidanti 102 Akarapanchakochchara- 210 Achalo'pi tadudv gad- 65 Akaryamavashistam yatt
Achetane katham puja 432 Akalavarshabhugale 577 Acchhedo muktiyogyayaya Akalesadhanam saurya . 520 Achyutendro'janishtapt- 53 Akale champakashoka- 417 Ajanai vaishravano dharanisvara 237 Akirtinishphalaa'achandra- 307 Ajanyandhakavrishtayakhya 351 Akurvan panchamam deva 326 Ajnana tapasane na Aakritimanjinagara
Ajnana bijasamrudha Akritimani nirjetum 446 Ajnanasamshayakanta
158 Akritva me kumaro'gna 435 Anjanatmaanjanau shraddha
189 Akhandasya trikhandasyadhipatyam 64 Atatyesha cha bhizhayai
530 Akhande dhatakikhande
Animādiguṇah sapta Agatya kshanikatvam 176 Animādiguṇopeta Agandhanastu tadbahrau 112 Anumaniti harshena
267 Agaman puutana tasu 367 Atah param muhurta che- 530 Agatt tadanumageṇ 488 Atikramya kutirthani
443 Agadarani nakshatre 210 Atikramyadima marge 274 Agadho'yam puranadhi 441 Atipatanipeetas- 320 Agur guna gunibhava- 88 Atiraudaya dhara tatra
550 Agraja tava papo'yam
Ativahvagato vira- 343 Agrajasyaastadagatya 486 Ativistar bhirutva- 575 Agrajo'asyaiva bhadraaya 144 Atikkshananakhadamstro'ya- 464 Agraman darasailasya 60 Atitanan visvabhuyeshan Agrasane vidhayanam 522 Atulbalamalavatha- 373 Amibhutirabhutsanu- 407 Atripyadesha bhoopala- 102 Abhibhutau gataprane 47 Ato'nyatprakrtam bramo 362 Amila grihini toko 16. Ato vijayadevi cha 467 Amilāyaṁ dhanashri
Atyalpam truptimapanna- 216 Agresarasphurchakra- 316 . Atra ka gatiranyesham 250 .
Atra jambudrumalaksya 172 Atra nabhanguram kinch- 165 Atra pandutanujana 420 Atraamutra cha mitravana hitakrit 12 Atraiva bharate raja 245 Atraiva bharate vanga
234 Atraiva bharate shriman Ath kamsavadhumukta- 375 Ath kashchitkhago madhye
162 Ath kritva mahapuja 261 Ath kaushambyadhisasya 162 Ath kshemangkarah prithvya
180 Ath gauribhavam chaivam Ath chakrapurikhan- 186 Ath chandra prabha swam shrath jambudrumalaksye Ath jambumati dvipe Ath jambumati dvipe 329 Ath tannagaraadhisha shrath tasmad anadgah- 524 Ath tau renukiputra 227 Ath tau saha gachhanta- 78 Ath di duracharah 231 Ath divyadhvanetu 467 Ath nemi kumaro'pi 385 Ath putra vanama pushpa- 225 Shrath maunavratenaite Ath maunavratenaayam Ath priyankarakhyaya 554 Ath bhattarako'pyasma- 464 Ath mandaraparyanta- 176 Ath bhrantva bhave dirgha 126 Ath yuddhe kurukshetre
421 Ath vatsahaye deshe 485 Ath vajrayudhadhisho 184 Athava'ainmate nedam- 166
161
23
422

Page #609:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**Verse 1:**

* The great king of the Vidhyadharas, the enemy of the demons,
* Sita, the embodiment of virtue,
* Rama, renowned for his valor and other qualities,
* And the glorious Nagadatta,
* Having seen all the dead,
* And remembering their past lives,
* Trembling with fear,
* Performing their virtuous deeds,
* And bringing their own cities,
* In that city, this story was told,
* In the month of Madhava,
* During the time of the blind rain,
* In the form of Rama,
* Here, Narada, the messenger of the gods,
* Here, in the city, the self-realized,
* Here, in Bharat, the celestial beings,
* Here, for the sake of liberation,
* Immediately after,
* Immediately after,
* Then, in the joy of liberation,
* Then, the prince,
* Then, the Jina, Neminatha,
* Then, in the month of Magha,
* Then, the great king,
* Then, he went with his companions,
* Then, having assembled,
* Then, the prince,
* Then, the joy of the world,
* Then, the sight,
* Then, having again obtained,
* Then, the great king,
* The great hero,
* Then,
* Then, seeing him,
* Then, seated,
* Then, his own falsehood,
* Then, undefeated,
* Then, the worshipful kingdom,
* Then, it is revealed,

**Verse 2:**

* In the land of Bharat,
* The hero, the protector of the world,
* There is a place called Nagaloka,
* In that very place,
* In the land of Bharat,
* In the land of Bharat,
* For the sake of enjoying,
* The lord of this island,
* Having gone by that means,
* Being desired without any difference,
* In Bharat, in Dwaravati,
* Approaching him out of love,
* Not giving, with a wicked mind,
* Twelve villages,
* What is seen, what is touched,
* With lotus-like face unseen,
* Searching for Sita,
* Seeing my daughter there,
* Today, at the end of the fast,
* Today, the pair of doves,
* From today, the world,
* Today, all of us were born,
* Climbing the mountain peak,
* Below, the eighth meal,
* Below, some women,
* The kingdom without weapons,
* Climbing the bed of the gods,
* With joy, all the scriptures,
* Studying the eleven limbs,
* Studying desire,
* By the travelers,
* The main city called Nagara,
* The forerunner of love,
* Love, with that forest,
* The best, by his own virtue,
* In the infinite lineage of Jinas,
* Infinite, the infinite faults,
* Infinite power, at the end,
* Infinite power, the lord of the universe,
* Infinite, I am Indrahood,
* Inaccessible Lakshmi,
* Coming to the inaccessible,
* The one who has no other refuge,
* The greatness not revealed,
* This is suitable for these two,
* Not abandoning Sita, you,
* In the beginning, the end, the child,
* The endless bondage,
* In the beginning, the birth,
* Not adorned with mind,
* Without covering, the place,
* The happiness of the unstruck,
* Seeking the pleasures of heaven,
* Eternal impurity, suffering,
* Eternal, eternal wisdom,
* Seeing, I will not be liberated,
* Different from the perfect characteristics,
* The army given, and the army,
* This is unspoken, proven,
* Going to the Ganges,
* Favoring him, it must be said,
* For the sake of favor, his own,
* For the sake of favor, his own,
* With his brothers, anxiety,
* In the supreme, Jayanta,
* Running, falling,
* Observation, the form,
* Experiencing days elsewhere,
* Experiencing great suffering,
* Experiencing happiness in that,
* Experiencing there, in Saketa,
* Inference, the main,
* Using the knowledge of the limit,
* Attached, he destroyed the whole,
* Anushtubh meter, it is known,
* Performing thus, he also,
* It should be performed, that righteous,
* Following quickly, with them,
* Dance, inspired joy,
* In the countries of communication,
* By this, this state was,
* By this very method,

Page #610:
---------------------------
m
Celebrated
G
172
182
In the Mahapurana, Uttara Purana, the end is inevitable here
Those who have accumulated good deeds in the past by others 527. Due to unpleasantness, the father abandoned 241, internal anger and passions 530, and others, including sons, grandsons, etc. 326. The three powers are fruitless, others are in the inner palace 342, the cause of mutual suffering
Without understanding the devotee of Dharma, that 563, I am the last of the Kevalis in this
Obscured by ignorance and darkness 549, abandoning the last two,
Abhaya, the wise son 479, even the last body has seven 56. I experienced long-lasting enjoyment
423, it happened in Podana too
155, even from others, a little bit of fault, 466, it happened to Priyamitra
185, the celestial sphere, the earth, the limbs 150
He was suitable, so he too 223, it happened like the Himalayas, abandoning the inner scriptures
Seeing him seeking, he said 345, his lack of beauty 240, within a moment 472, seeking, fighting back 64, there was a rain of happiness, the blind snake's lair 264, seeking the two men 268, his glory was in the middle, he gave him food to eat 466, the impartial wise men
Free from the light of the sun 321, other than the treaty, here is another 251, the absence of offspring 284, the Brahmin said to the king, otherwise, I will punish you 111, it is harmful, it was heard
Approaching, attacking 133, once in that city 486, the four aspects of ignorance 464, born with a family
54, once, infinite brilliance and glory 15, and great suffering
You know, once, Ratasena, another 184, the other day, the hunters 366, recognition of him, this is the name of another's wife 286, the name of the invincible, strong 246, recognition by the king 299, once, Suvrata, the name
The other, cut off by the sword 52, this is his recognition 495, the other, he was sent for a purpose 437, in the afternoon, thousands 4,335, this is his recognition, the other, he was the great king
Not abandoning the association 215, having declared his own knowledge 551, the other, the king of other countries, some of the bad winds
Having declared his own end 551, the other, Upendra Sena, the name, taking away, the tunnel collapse
Having declared the most sinful 551, the other, the three of them, fame 16, the unapproachable, the wheel, the end
Saluting the Jina, all 551, injustice, other than wealth 110, sinless, happiness, cut off
Overcoming all enemies
229, others, meanwhile, let them tell the stories of the Bhagavans 211, those who have attained sinlessness, the body, the wise 467, the city dwellers were attacked, others, from the attack of the lion
Others, they went to the gods 367, removing, sweet talk 520, others, more accused 367, others, they went to the garden of the city 466, even you, being young
Others, they went to Nandagop's 367, even if you destroy the lake, immediately 181, saluting the Jina, the lord 191, others, they went to Nandana, the name of the mountain 177, the childless has no way 223, saluting, then, Dharma, others, they went with some of the city dwellers 545, the king of the birds asked 502, he asked, what is the fruit of these 333, not meeting with resistance, the path
Not meeting with resistance, his brilliance 178, not meeting with resistance, the brilliance goes 178, not meeting with resistance, the brilliance goes
Anointing, the kingdom of the three parts 324, others, they went to Sanjayanta, the name 106, not rejecting, the name, Mishra 159
Anointing, as desired 378, others, they went to Siddhakutastha 402, not rejecting, the delusion 158, anointing, dividing 214, others, they went to Supratistha, the name
Anointing, dividing, loudly 129, others, they went to the cook of this 226, not being careless, the qualities of the chariot 199, anointing, the hall 550, others, they went to that city, Gautama 250, not being careless, the qualities of the chariot
Seeking again, bringing back
227
46
.
231
»

Page #611:
---------------------------
##  Translation:

**Order of the Names of the Chapters**

583
530
142 369 389 498 293 354 436
410
3
432
499
213 222
177 412
550
22 176
434
487
244
He attains the desired fruit 554 He ate, in the past, quickly, the chariot named Chitra 393 He was also victorious, here, Srivijaya 165 He was fit for auspicious yoga, this one. Seeing that unprecedented one 145 He saw that, to be seen, 253 He saw that, the earth-devas, etc., these two were sons 253 He became, the chariot named Simha 393 He became, unbroken friendship 393 He became, full of qualities, what then? 220 He became, unblamed, this noble one 162 They became, unable, there 505 He became, our guru, from him 505 He went to Ayodhya, the city, Sita 280 Worshipping with devotion, bowing down 297 He studied, with joy, eagerly 509 He studied, in youth, as long as 509 He studied, the glory of Prabhesha 509 He attained, or, the rank of Abhra 509 He was prosperous, these two, before 167 He went, with virtuous deeds 494 He went, in many ways, young 171 He was, with immeasurable qualities, named 171 He was, the son of Amara, or, the Kumar 353 He was, the best minister, learned, you 271 These are, the subjects, Kachchha 189 From him, death, fortune 352 In this, Bharatavarsha 102 These hands, by nature 438 Nectar, without investigation 438 With nectar, this one's body 438 Immeasurable, the swan-share 133 Water, or, lotus-leaves 133 This one, and, the first, in the great time 256 This one, sinful, great-bodied 256 This one, with all sins removed 205 Unasked, not given 148 He attained, the state of yoga 148 He should stay, in Ayodhya, the city 186 He will now, rule, Ayodhya 186 The king of Ayodhya, also, for the sake of writing 257 The king of Ayodhya, in that 257 He did not experience, the meaning of birth 189 He was, not born, and, born 189 For the sake of not going, to the forest 519 O, lotus-king 519 He was, named, Ariinjaya, in Tripura 142 He was, called, Ariinjaya, enemy 514 He was, with the army of Arishta, etc., 514 He was, named, Arishta, the sura, others went 367 He was, in the mind, of the husband 146 He was, the descendant of Areshti-tirtha 228, 235 He was, the Jina, born, glorious 219 He was, the son of Arka-kirti, doing 164 He was, the son of these two, Arka-kirti 452 He was, the son of Arka-kirti 148 The needy, what again, should be said? 462 The needy, with wealth-satisfaction 80 In meaning, the fourfold, livelihood 25 In meaning, truth, speech, truth 25 Half-burnt, corpse, thinking 25 Half-kingdom, and, the aforementioned 508 He was, with the servants, etc., together 408 He was, spoken by the worthy, the verse 408 Enough, that, with devotion 461 He was, the ornament, of the family 461 He was, decorating, his own shadow 208 He was, decorating, the garland, wear 515 He was, not transgressed, by anyone, here 302 He was, not transgressed, by others, virtue 378 He was, not attained, kingdom, attained 378 Enough, from the root, burnt 312 He was, not smeared, with the cuckoo's song 312 He was, not small, the circle of cows 312 He was, not understood, the fruit, of those 122 He was, not entered, the ocean of water 545 He was, descended, as if, from heaven 412 He was, descended, born 412 He was, understood, the speech, of that one 412 He was, understood, by his son 412 He was, gone, to the country of Avanti 412 He was, understood, that, self 412 He was, understood, the lawfulness 412 He was, despised, the gurus, also 412 He was, despised, again, but 412 He was, descended, the sky-parts 412 He was, turned, the thread of the eyes 412 He was, increased, by the Kumar 412 He was, increased, the qualities, in him 412 He was, to be increased, these two, thus 412 He was, increased, the body, of that one 412 He was, seen, love-stricken 412 He was, certainly, the enjoyments, of Mangura 412 He was, certainly, your, liberation 412 He was, not measured, the two, of the chariot 412 He was, in the state, he attained, that 412 He was, descended, the suras, all 412 He was, the bearer of the banner, eleven 412 He was, attained, with his sons 412 He was, attained, the state, of liberation 412 He was, not to be stopped, by his own valor 412 He was, not considered, then, possessed 412 He was, not known, the fruit, of eating 412 He was, not known, by the ignorant, the meaning of the scriptures 412 He was, not destroyed, by ignorance, thus, possessed 412 He was, not divided, the glory,

Page #612:
---------------------------
584
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
44
206
376
460
Ashraana Yadvibhootyasmai 510 Asti Jeevah Sa Chopaattah. 467 Aho Paapasyako'pyesha 266 Ashvagreevaa Kharagreevaa 146 Asti Dwijatanoojaayaa 473 Aho Pravridhdham Agnanaam 455 Ashvagreevasutaau Rat. 184 Astu Karnaamidhaano'ya- 346 Ahobihi Kaichidasaady 362 Ashvagreevascha Sambhraantah 146 Astu Kaayah Shuchi Sthaasnu 89 Ahobihi Bahubhi Shaataa 535 Ashvagreevasya Kanak- 142 Astu Chenmatsya Bandhaadi- 272
[Aa] Ashvagreevena Devena 146 Astu Va Nahatavyakti- 273
Shraakanthapurnahaaro'pi 350 Ashvagreeve Ta Ete'pi 142 Astu Saankhyaadya Vaadaanaam- 470
Shraakakrushta Nirmuhkta- 310 Ashvagreevo'grimo Neela- 142 Asmatkumaarayostatra
276
Shraakarnay Tatpuraanacha 412 Ashvaakritidharam Devam 376 Asyatra Pushkaradweepah
Shraakarnay Naaradaadoot 104 Ashvai Rathaigajendrashcha 453 Asyatra Vishayo'ngaakhyah 526
Aakaarenaiva Kanyaartha
224 Ashtamo'bhoot Tripruishthaakhyo 561 Asyanyo'pi Taduchchitya- 286
Aakroshdbhi Saakaarunyo 516 Ashtaashashtisahasrokt- 100 Asyeva Deva Tava Chaudayi- 571
Aakhyaay Dharmayaathaatmyam 536 Ashtaangaani Nimittaani 150 Asyeva Sushrutaakhyaatam 142
Shraagatah Kamsamanjashaa
363 Ashtaadasha Sama Lakshaa 89 Asthaanastham Sameekshyaiva 168
Aagataamantare Drishtava 176 Ashtaadhikasahasrena 378 Asthiraadyashubhaanyeva 558
Aagataameva Matputree 302 Ashtaapadamayaih Kumbhai 153 Asmin Khagapuraadheesha- 132
Shraagaty Nripaterane Ashtaavangulayastasya Asmin Janmanyamumannye 100
Aagatyaabhyarchya Vanditvaa
536 Ashtaavinshatipoorvaanga- 68 Asmijvalaakaraalaanau
Aagantaasmai Punarnetu Ashtaavinshatirasyaasan 236 Asmin Trilokprajnaasi 117
Aagaamyutsarpini Kaala- 473 Ashtottarasahasroru 323 Asminnevaabhavatttirthe
132
Aagraham Nigraham Krutvaa Ashtopavaasamaadaaya 376 Asminvidehe Poorvasmin 537
Praachaarah Keedrishastesha- 556 Ashtau Vijayaraamaadyaa 327 Asminnevojayinyaakhy- 404, 488
Shraachchhidyaham Graheeshyaami Ashtau Shishtaamaanini 18 Asminnaraavate Khyaate 182
Shraajnaa Yadyasti Devasya Asankhyadevadevee day 17, 123 Asminnairaavate Ratnapure 186
Shraacharyapanchakam Praapy
404 Asankhyaato Marutsanghah Asminnuttarashrenyaam- 142
Shraatriteeyabhavaattasya 84 Asanyamaadikam Sarvam Asyatmaabodhasadbhaava
Shraatasaamaayikah Shuddhaya 437 Asanyame Trayam Dve Stah 55 Asyavayavabhaavaatte
Shraatmana Mantribhirbandhu- 253 Asanghtamaanaasevya Asyaiva Tirthasantaane 428
Shraatmano Ghaatake Traayake 556 Asahya Vedanaatasya Asyotpattou Samutpatti
Aatmapradeshasanchaaro 156 Asaarapraaggreetaartha 138 Aham Kil Sukhee Saukhya- 73
Aatmastavonyninda Cha 521 Asi Daanavibhaagajo Aham Gurustapasveeti
Shraatmasnushaamalankartu
551 Asi Shankho Dhanuchchakram
148
Ahacha Tannimittora 447 Aatmaayamaatmanaatmaaya. Asuraatvam Samaasaady 177 Aham Prabhurmaamaayam Kim 436 Shraatmendriyaayuristaartha Asau Kadaachidaashaadh Aham Mama Shubham Nityam
Shraadade Sanyam Pashcha- 351 Shraasau Manoharodiyaane
Aham Satyandharaadheesha
525 Shraadaajaineshwaram Roopam 148 Asau Maasopavaasaante 538 Aham Anyaditi Dvaabhyaam 66 Shraadaatumichchhato Gantum Astambhyudyataroko Va Ahaaryatadvisham Jnaatvaa 154 Shraadaatsanyamamaasaady
16 Asti Kim Naasti Va Jeevah. 467 Ahimsavaataraksharth
556 Shraadaay Krutrimangam 360 Asti Cheddravyamaekam Te 178 Ahimsaalakshanam Dharmam
263 Shraadaay Taam Yathaayogya 170 Asti Tatrayeva Desho'nyo- 61 Ahimsaalakshano Dharmo
201
Shraadaay Dheemaamstaam Vidya 412 Asti Mandodarinaam 263 | Ahirva Swaakrutaavaasah 1

Page #613:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved in English Translation:

200
453
514
14
536
218
Shlokanamakaradyanukramah
585 Shraddhaya samyamam praptya 176. Praptair duhkhena tad duhkhad 303 / Avartani samgrahaṇi 164 adaya sadhurmudhanyam 106. Shrapasyashutvam ityaha 465 Shravansanstatra nishchata 465 Shradhavanindita bhoga- 211 Abhashyamanamakshipya 284 | Avam tapah karishyava 424 Shradhavenacchhinattantri 356 Abhyamadyantadanabhya- 76 Shravam tvamaagatau 146 Adikalyanasatpuja. Shramadhyam rasikamula Shravam sannyas'ya tatraiva Adititirthakrito jyeshtha- 446 | Shramananti puranashah 312 Shravabhyamavayoh karya- 253 Adibhattarakotpanna Shramulatkaryamakhyaya 462 Avamaprashnayavedam 176 Shradimadhy'antag'ambhi. 438
Amladbhasmitam vikshya 433 Aveshinidashammanya 164 Shradim narake tasma- 565 Amrah kramah phalairnmrah 166
Prashasyasi sukham supta Shradityadapadashailendra 314 Ayagajapuram priti'h 510
Shrashaasyasi sukham supta Shraditya'bhas'tato meruḥ 116 Ayasanyagnit'rptani 425
Ashcharyapancakam chapi  _89 Shraditya'bhas'tada devo 107 Ayanntamavadhitsopa
460
Ashvasau me prahetavyo 64 Shraditya'bhah sa evaha'n Prayanti durato drish'tava 155
Ashtashthaprthibhaga- 456 Adityo'dgamavela'yam Ayuh paramasankhyatah
Ashadhamasi jyotsna'yah 425 Shradyacakrivadeshopa Ayur dashasa'hasrani 333
Ashadhasya shukle paksha 460 Shradyajanmano lobha- 110 Ayurante tatastasmin na
Prashad'he svatiyoge ta. 333 Shradyashreni samaruhya 161 Shrayurante'vadhistha'na
Shrashtahnikanmahapuja 336 Shradhanapriti suprit'i- 177 Ayurante samadhana
Asanshchakratapatra'si ૨૪૨ Adharadheyabhavopa Shrayuranyaccha vidhvamsi
Shrasaktisteshu cedasti 226 Adhavanntam vilokya'sau 375 Shrayurevantakopa'ntas'tham
Prasadyaikadashangoru Adhikyam chakshushoh prahuh 205 Shrayushite chaturbhage
Shrasisisihara'tho. 216 Shradhikyad bhavaleshe'va Shrayushopa'nte sa'nnyas'ya
Shrasidihava malaye 326 Pradhipatyam tadavapyam 104 Ayushopa'nte samadhana
Astam tavadida'n bhara 108 Adhipatyam trikhandas'ya 176 Ayushoh vasatih kaye
Shrastamanyatra tadbhitya 64 Shradhipatyam dvayoh shreṇyo- 148 Shraranale'na sammibham 466
Shrastamana'dinigala- 568 Shranandanatakam cha'sya 57 Prara'mbya virahavrtam
323
Shrasavasy'a cha samrodha'h Anandas'tasya bharyaya'n 404 Aryikaṇancha dikshaya'h 361
Ahantumasa'marthah sma 367 Anamnramara'bhunabaschara'shirah 326 Arshama'trashrute'n cha'sta
Shrahamindram sukham muk'hya- 26 Panayya tena nirmaya 264
Ahartumudyatah sarve Shrarshampasaka'vedokta 360
258 Shranushangikamettatte
Shraharamdharma'mitrakhy'ah 215 Aradhana'n samaradhya 250 Shranetum tanyashakya'ni
Aharadityayotsarga'h 16. Praru'hya jambavanyuddhe Shrapanchamakshitiv'yapti
Shrahitanymata'h santu Shraruhya navamambhodhi 486 Shrapanchamavaneratma- 245
Ahito dehina dehe Shraruhya shatrusainyasya Shrapatadrdddhapaksha'ni- 320
Ahito bahudhamo'hapa'raruhya shivika surya Arudhaturyacha'ritram
Ahutopa'si mahishena 228 Apatanti vilokyo'lka- 68 Shraropyata chapaudhan 380 Shrapandugandmabha'si Arogyam shivikame'vam 540
[I] Praptapurṇayauvanara'mbha 511 Shrarohashivika'n tasma- 262, Ikshvakuh kashyapo gham'sha- 56-67 Shrapeturnabhasasta'da Alambya lakshanairl'ayam
Ikshvakuvam'shavikhy'ato Shraptagamodina'natva- 158 Alocya mantribhih sard'dha- 156 . Ikshvakoh padmanabhasya 238 Shrasah katipayairev ૨૨૪ Avarja'yantyah keshana'n 485 Ingitaishcheshṭitaistasya'h 506
74
16
464 226
36
505
66

Page #614:
---------------------------
153
521
M
411
265
68
536
376
315
226
Purudd
Mahapuraane Uttarapuraanam Itah KaneeYase Vidya iti TadbhaBhugaakarnYa 117: iti Nirdhyaaya Nirvidya
386 Itah KhecharabhuubharNuiti Tadvachanam Chitte
iti Nirbhatsito Bhuuyah 62 Itah Parijano Raam .. 264 iti Tadchanam Shrutvaa 143, 344,
iti Nividh Yaang
363, 407, 544 Itah Prakrutamanyattu
370 360
iti Nirvidya Samsaraat Itare'pi Tayoreva
262 iti Tadvachanaprante
102 474, 537
| iti NirvedasanyogadBhoiiti Tadvachanaajaat  Itach Amarachanchavakhya
334 iti Tadvachanaat Sarve:
iti Nishchitya Paapaatmaa
268 Itah Satyandharaakhyasya 466 iti Tadvachanaat So'pi
iti Naimittikam Drishyaa 146 Itah Sa VindhyashaktYaakhyo 63 iti Tadvachanaadveet 
iti Naisaargikaashepa163
365 Itah Mutavaiyogen
iti Tadvachanaadesha
553 iti Paramamavaapya 
210 Itah Tato Bhata Vyastaah 321 iti Tadvachanaallabdh
iti Poorvarpivaakyasya 271 Itah Trtiye Kanyasha 512 iti Taddhatusambhoot
iti Prishto Jinaadheesho
172 Itah Swaamistvameheeti 57 iti Tanmuniraakanyaam
iti Prishtava Pratopayenaim 161 iti KatipayavaagmivarDhamaanam 572
iti Tallaokamaudhyaanch 476 iti Prakaashopo'bhoo  524 iti Kamaagnitaptana 285 iti Tasmin Mahim Paati
iti Pratinivrutyashuiti Kenapyupaayena 466 iti Tasmai Sutaam Yogyaam 506
iti Pratyaapya Tam Paapah
266 iti Ksheerakadambaatma268 iti Tasyah Pariprasne
iti Pratyaahatu: Karn- 242 iti Garjansamaakraantiti Taam Janmanirvaana - 156
iti PrabhootadravyeNa 276 iti Gopansamutsohya 372 iti Taam Maamivaapunyaah 301 iti Pralaambhanam Tasy iti Chakri Samalochya iti Taan Varayan Kruddhaan 388
iti Prabriddhpunyaanu- 233 iti Chitte Vinamyait
iti Taapasaveshena
500
iti Prata: Samutthaya 522 iti Chintayatstasy
86 iti Tirtheshina Proktam 416 iti Prapayatam Devi 550 iti Chetasai Sampashyan 208 iti Tushtvaa Nirvaarya Dvaak  360 iti Prahaivamukte'pi iti Chetoharai: Sita 288 iti Tena Khagaa Mugdhaah
iti Bhaktena Tenokta  . 78 iti Chetsansritau Janti 301 iti Tena Sa Prishtah San 186
iti Bhaktyaa Kritaalpaa iti Jeevasya Yaathaatmyam 468 iti TenoktamaakarnYa
iti Bhavayataam Pumsam iti Jainiimaam Paani- 163 iti Tvatkantaya Rajan 155 iti Bhitvaa Tadabhyarna
548 iti Tam Cha Tato Devo 18 iti Trividhanived -
iti Bhuuyo NarendraNa iti Tadgadhahasokti 
iti Daasisutam Gehaa
160 iti Matvaa Jinproktam
554 iti Tadgautamaadheesha  464 iti Dootam Tadaayaatam
iti Matvaanumaanena 483 iti Tachchravanaatsadyah 536 iti Devo Samabhyety
iti Matvaapi Saashankah 365 iti Tatkaalajan Sarvam 187 iti Devo'pyasau Tasy
180 iti Matvaa Visrjyaitaan 176 iti Tajinsheetaanshu- 164 iti Deviyaa KaneeYasyah 185 iti Matvaa Sutae Rajya- 117 iti Tatra Tayoraasid iti Dvaadashanirdisht  
iti Matvaa Swanamankah- 268 iti Tatravireyesh 172 iti Dvaadashabhedokta..
imi Mantriganama Sarpa- 306 iti TatproktamaakarnYa 306 iti Dwijoditam Shrutvaa 522 iti Maanodayaatpaapi 447 iti Tattvam Jinoddisht
iti Dvitiyakalyana
204 iti Yuddhaantamaasaadya 171 iti TatsamyagaakarnYa
187 iti Dvilakshapachaashat
iti Yudhya Chiram Vyaadhaan 501 iti Tavayatadruupa
17, iti Dharma ViniShchitya 458 iti Raktam Swayam Bhuuyo iti Taddevataaprokta  470 iti Dharmavishesham Tat । 326 | iti Rajapuraam Gatvaa 624 iti Taddevavaaksoudha  118 iti Naamnaa Suputraaya
| iti Rajopadeshena
556 iti Tadbhaasitam Shruyaa 500 iti Nirgatya Drishtavaamaam 553 | iti Vakri Bhavetsaapi 532
mr Mmm
x०॥
77
131
55
76

Page #615:
---------------------------
##  Verse Number Index

**87**
**358**
**15**
**253**
**548**
**223 376**
**155**
**m Mmmmmm**

**iti Vamanarupena**
**iti Bishatatattvam**
**iti Vidvatsabhamadhye**
**iti Vinyasite Sainye**
**iti Visvabhuvam Bhuyah**
**iti Vrudhoktimakarnnya**
**iti Sankhan Pristo'sau**
**iti Shabdarthagambhira**
**iti Srimadganadhisha**
**iti Srivijayam Doa**
**iti Srutava Munervakyam**
**iti Srutava Vacho Rasha**
**iti Srutya Samagatya**
**iti Samsarasadbhavam**
**iti Sangotavinadadi**
**iti Sa Cintayan Labdha**
**iti Sancintay Tau**
**iti Sancintaya Sanjata**
**iti Satpatrasampanna**
**iti Satpatranishpanna**
**iti Sadya Tato Dutau**
**iti Santushya Tatsarva**
**iti Sampurna Rajyay**
**iti Samprashnayamas**
**iti Sarva Manohari**
**iti Sarva Samakarnnya**
**iti Sarvamidam Srutava**
**iti Sarve'pi Sangatya**
**iti Sarva Samaasina**
**iti Sa Tadvacah Srutava**
**iti Savedy Bhupalam**
**iti Sitavacah Srutava**
**iti So'pi Kathamittham**
**iti So'pi Dayalutvai**
**iti So'pi Samasanna**
**iti Syadvadasandistrtam**
**iti Swakulyogyay**
**iti Swagatavrittant**
**iti Swapunyamahatmya**
**iti Swaputrapautraadi**
**iti Swanujasamprashna**

**iti Smaram Sca Bhavyanam 186**
**ityapraksham Tadavoca- 502 265**
**iti Stutvadikalpesho**

**ityaprakshit Tato'smabhih 505**
**iti Hastatalasphalane 267**
**ityaprakshid Asau Vasy 168 381**
**iti Hitakritavedi**

**ityaprakshis Tam Sapi 271**
**ityadi Kudrustant- 365**
**ityaprakshinnapo'pyasya 215**
**ityadam Janatasaven**

**ityabravittadakarnnya 146 363**
**hitadamuchitam Karya**

**ityabravittataday 363**
**imam Saptham Gantum**

**ityabravidadah Srutava 555**
**ito Jalnidhesttire**

**ityabravidasau So'pi Ito'tiduppamot sarpinya 556**
**ityabravidiyam Hetuh 513**
**ito Dhanyapurabhyarna- 550**
**ityabhistrayamansya**

**ito Nalinaketu Sca 182**
**ityamaatyasya Durvrittam 366**
**ito Lankamadhisthaya 284**
**ityamuncat Sahayai stai 467**
**ito Vinitanagaraat**

**ityayenayatenaiva 358**
**ito'sva Greevacakresho 145**
**ityavadi Tatatah Papi 265**

**ito'smin Dashame Bhavi 456**
**ityavadi Tdakarnnya 163, 262 175**
**ittham Gautamavaktradharajalasadva- 565**
**ityavocattadakarnnya**
**ittham Swakritasamstotrah**

**ityavochad Asau Chaita- 358 116**
**ittham Tenengitashena**

**ityavocannvacastesha- 208**
**ittham Sodashabhavanahita**

**ityasesham Ganeshokt- 416 147**
**ityagrasanamaasthaya 521**
**ityastavinsatibhutava**

**ityatah So'bravid Brahi 523**
**ityasabhyam Asodhavya 142**
**ityatastadvacah Srutava**

**ityasavapi Yogyena 540**
**ityato'laksundary 513**
**ityasau Ca Ganadhisha- 530 480**
**ityatyatarjayat So'pi**

**ityaso Tairadhikshiptah 521 566**
**ityatra Parashabdarth 106**
**ityasau Singhachandroktam 114 353**
**ityadhyakshiptan So'pi 407**
**ityasya Rajyasampraptau 35 271**

**ityanalocitarthasya**
**ityasya So'pi Vagjaaj 480**
**ityanalocyakaryangam 65**
**ityasya Dhenumaaday 225 165**
**ityanujnatasarvangam**

**ityasya Prahino'tpatram 551 106**
**ityanusrenikaprashna 472**
**ityakarnitatadvakyah 262**
**ityanena Sa Mantri Ca 276**
**ityakarnnya Tadoctum**

**ityantastattvato Jnatva 56**
**ityakarnnya Phanindrast- 108 465**
**ityanyo'nyakathakale 360**
**ityakarnnya Vachastasya 334**

**ityanyo'nyanvitapatya- 146**
**ityakarnnya Sudharmaakhya- 527 266**
**ityanvato'njanasunnu**

**ityakalayya Kalaadi 254**
**ityanvayungkt Sugreevah 297**

**ityakalayya Ko

Page #616:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:

588
66
486
287
532
201
268 308
5.7
468
64
384
476
In the Mahapurana, the Uttarapurana is so called - 311, he is said to be in samsara - 110, this is what is there, is there anything else? - 162, it is called the meaningful story - 286, thus said by that Nagendra - 107, this lake, by whom? - 517, thus said by them, either with anger or - 521, now in Pundarikini - 187, thus the Puranas are called - 277, by these words she was silenced.

Now also that wicked one - 146, by these words his mind - 270
Indu (the moon) desires beauty, thus seeing his own mistress - 505, thus said by the Naigama - 376, Indra and Shveta, the two Ramas - 224, thus concealing himself - 225, thus disparaging himself with the great instruments of Indra - 460, thus speaking of hunger, thirst etc. - 151, Indrajit and other kings - 136, thus thinking of Indrajit, Indracharmati etc. - 161, thus placing her on the chariot - 153, Indranila's body - 263, thus for the destruction of the enemy - 244, thus with the name Indravarmana - 266, 315, 322, thus born from that - 475
Attached to the objects of the senses - 65, thus himself going - 42
Indra, Upendra and other armies - 161, thus with appropriate words - 65, thus said the god, what is true? - 65
Ibhya's son will be born - 531, thus by the logic - 236, just by saying this - 172
This arrogant speech - 310, thus commands you, O god - 188, thus the Ugrasena's words arose - 385
These two initiated ones, by whom? - 524, thus hearing the command - 418, thus the chief of the assembly spoke loudly - 405
These learned ones in the kingdom - 283, thus attaining the lordship - 207, thus the garland of lofty words - 52
This girl, thus asked - 420, thus placing the jewel-limbed - 238, thus lifting up the prince - 188
Like the elephant's breath - 268, thus placing him on the golden seat - 366
What was desired by me, that desired one - 477, thus spoken, that is true - 478, thus with the arrogantly uttered - 266, of the eighteen desired grains - 88, thus the hidden thought - 36, thus he resorted to the means - 276
Here in the Kshatriya city - 117, thus breaking the noose of hope - 33
In the Jambumati continent - 1,213,403, thus consoling the muni - 461, thus his words in private - 327
Here by the teaching of dharma - 537, thus said the muni, and he also - 536, thus knowing this - 537
Here in Purvavidehadvipa - 402, thus hearing those words - 162, 266, 285, thus quickly saying this - 466
Here individually for each of these - 116, 260, 363, thus by this teaching - 147
Here love has brought me - 285, thus said the two, let it be so - 285, thus all these - 168
Here by the kings with their retinues - 547, thus he said with reverence - 26, thus becoming indifferent - 540
Here also they will surely come - 421, thus he himself said - 250, and this must be done - 483
Here itself in Bharata-kshetra - 305, thus hearing that, he also - 414
Here itself the one called Shridhara - 63, thus they said, and hearing that - 262, 513, 518
This is to be considered here - 272, such are these proofs - 106, thus said the minister - 236
This is to be believed of him - 151, such is the nature of samsara - 113, thus spoke the two in anger - 164
This is something else somewhere - 541, such perishable knowledge - 14, Ishana-Indra knowing this - 146
This and that - 521

Page #617:
---------------------------
Slokanamakaradyanukramah
596
424
140
264
168
546
Isano'ntyam dasam yato isannimilitalolaIshano'ntyam dasam yato isannimilitalolaUgrasenas tadalokya udyatabhinavaprayam uccaihsthitamidamm pashya ucchedya kotimarodhau ujjayinyamathanyed-dyuutkrshtajivitam tatra utkrshtayuhsthitistatra utkrshtena shatam saptauttarabhimukhah paushe uttishtha svaviblho muktautpanna yauvanam tasya utpanna svaminah kinchidutpannamayudhagare utpatascha pure'bhuvanudarkkurushu nirshishtodarkhyam khagadhishodagamenaiva nitaudatishthattadaivamiudanvaniva ratnasyaudayadivikalpenaudayadimivarudhyaudayannoday-adasya udayastamayo nityamudarasparsha-margena udgame'pi pratapo'syauddhrityashanivegasyauddhrityelakhyayapyaneudbhutavismayo'prucchad unnatamurijitam tejounmadiva madivandho upakaram mahan-tam meupacarashadabhyetya upayabhyaparam shreshthiupayantimimam vikshyupayogakshama-sheshoparya-shanivegakhyaupalasphalana-kshepaupavishya tadabhyase 52 | upavistanijacaram 367 | ekadharmatkam sarvam 476 | upavishto muda tena 304 ekavimsatirardhanam 558 upasarga vijitya'sya 346 ekastrilokasikharam 326 365 upasarga vyad-hatteshu 525 ekadashavid-hastatra 552 20 upasarga vyad-han-mantri 358 ekadashasa-hashra-shrimad-dha- 564 upadhyayatvamadhyasya 486 ekadashangadhari san 14,40,128 64 upadhyayo'pi kalantarena- 501 ekadashasa-hasravad-hi 465 upayamekamalochy upayashchintya-tam ko'pi 266 ekikrtayativat 74 416 upaya yen-a sashchintya ekoapi simhasadrisah 230 562 upayo'yam vyadhayye-vam 271 etatpushpai-h pravalas-cha 287 upayaistabhiruddha-ta- 263 etatputa-karajo jyeshtha 251 uparjitaparadhru- 108 etad-artha kulinanam 161 141 upasaka-dvil-akshyacyo 74 | etad-eva vidhataram 270 upekshito'yam-adyaiva 155 106 etad-evarthashastra-sya 106 264 ubhayanayabhedabhyam etad-vitayam-atraiva 444 ubhayayattasiddhi-tvad etad-bhavana-ya vava 147 etarajyam parityajya 226 451 umaya samamakhyaya 466 enan-nivasinirjitva ulkapatanamaloky 342 etanmam madhuram satyah 16 etayopendrasanaty 361 ulmalkalirivayadd-ha 162 557 [U] etasyanan-damatyash-cha 175 244 urdhvagreveyakasyad-ho 16 etasyaiva gunairlakshmi 58 185 316 urdhvavaktravamad-vahni 320 240 urdhvavrajyasvabha-vatva 124 etasmin bharate varse 413 266 [R] etasmin sambhaved-eta- 110 etani santi me naiva aksheshashthopavasena 442 etansahajashatrutva-d rcho vedarahasyani- 266 356 etu grihnattu ko doshah 126 rjavo dharmi-ka vitadoshah 44 ete kramena panchapi 564 rjuklanadititire 384 ete cha nichaka yasma- 563 552 rjush-cha vipulakhyash-cha 337 ete trayoapi vidyanam 262 rjutvaj jare pranan 67 etena pariharena 176 rnam savriddhikam tavat 342 etesham kramashahkale 560 377 rtam vachi dayachite 488 ete sarve'pi saketa- 558 bhuddhayah saptasarvanga 468 etaih sukham-asau svaptaih 526 [E] etau tatra trayastrimsat 168 ekako'pi hali sarvan 264 etya rajagriha sardham 554 ekatrimshatsamu-drayuh 34 emirdharmopadeshartham 221 ekatrimshatsahastre-bda- 356 evam karmavashajantuh 118 356 | ekatrinshatsamudrayuh 556 evam kale prayatyesa 360 235 22 106 316

Page #618:
---------------------------
560
553
206 557
357
26
538
422
362
60
And Kubera Datta, with this perfect knowledge, in this time, in this four-fold existence, for a long time, drinking water for a long time, in that place, in that, what kind of penance? And while he was doing penance, and while he was doing penance, they went, and those great souls, and those born, and that terrible war, and the three-fold path of truth, and in those days, going, and with a bad result, and in the divine state, in the day, and in the goddess, with Tuja, and with twelve gods, and with twelve numbers, and always at the end of the night, and with five-fold wings, and in the tradition, and by the father, with sorrow, and separately described, and every thousand years, and in this time, he goes, and praying to me, and as stated in the law of bondage, and done outside by all, and bound by the intermediate existence, and excluded from the intermediate existence, and the lord of the earth-dwellers, and the great sage there, and Rama, drinking for a long time, and the king's happiness, the glorious one, and with other amusements, and while he was wandering, and worldly happiness, and abandoning the vow, and the remaining nine places, and the jackal, greedy
Mahapuraana, Uttarapuraana, and the righteous faith of the Shravakas
462 Who should be used as a Samavid - 304 and uniting the time 26 Some elephant, having passed - 371
And having spent years - 326 A small fort, with a garland, a jewel - 324 120 And the essence of the world
22 Waist, shore, waist-string 288 And those who have attained good fortune 421 Thorns, as it were, of the kingdom, and beautifying the whole body
Of the throat, what praise of his would be - 28 530 And with happiness, happiness itself
153 How, who, from whom was he born 130 387 And with happiness, in this time 236. How is that, if you ask
523 66 And with happiness, of the earth-bearer
181
How is that, if you ask, in this 259 325 And with happiness, of all 2 2 How is it that Sagara Datta, named, and by his own good deeds
236
How is it that the other world 382 And by the ripening of his own good deeds
How is it like a madman
257 156 And others also, by them, others 322
Stories, describing with joy 503 Thus said to him
443 Stories and storytellers, so much 356
Let it be told, said the divine 513 Thus, him, the self-enlightened
Let it be told, said the sinner 556 This one, this man, liberation 520
Kadamba sand, heat
455 This one, this is my messenger
Kadamba tree, root, this one, this is to be known by the law 562 335
Banana fruit, showing respect 224 This god, brought by the king, his kingdom 344 106
Sometimes, the king of the earth 161 This one, in a previous birth, an enemy - 181 82
Sometimes, the lord of the earth-dwellers 165 This one, enjoying the prosperity of the kingdom 261 156
Sometimes, Chetaka, named, this one, this mountain, the Vidyadhara 266
Sometimes, Chetaka, going 483 [ Ai ]
Sometimes, the autumnal waters, in the unity of the confluence, even this is not
178
Sometimes, on a water journey 512 418 Airawata elephant, trunk
Sometimes, born with dispassion 306
Airawati river, on the bank 18,164 Sometimes, by the father of the Jina 464
Airawati river, on the south bank 484 Sometimes, in that forest 44 267 Indra's, facing, becoming 324 Sometimes, in the month of Kartik 77,246 175 [ Au ]
Sometimes, by the gain of time
Sometimes, by the gain of time, with the knowledge of the origin, etc. 466
160
Sometimes, by some, with eagerness, going to that place
471.
181 Indifference, happiness, that too
Sometimes, to that city, going back 512 287
Sometimes, by him, going to [ Ka ]
Sometimes, his daughters, proud 5.28 Kamsa, as he should be, looked at 366 Sometimes, at the beginning of the rainy season 233,348 354 Kamsa, named, called together 363 Sometimes, Singhasena
112 455 Kamsa, hearing that word 366. Sometimes, thinking 515 457 By Kamsa, by his own servant
363 Sometimes, the earth-bearer 218 5.62 Kasa, also, at the time of birth 363 Sometimes, Dharma Sena, named 401 534 | Who, whom, what does he say, to whom 413 | Sometimes, by the speed of going, he became
466
220
136 558
81
16 340
356
36

Page #619:
---------------------------
MS 6. 25
317
326
27
346
114
286
128
276
Sloka Anukrama (Order of Verses)
561 Kadachirashmi vego | Kareṇa Shuraseno 'ham
360 Kasmin kena katham kasmat kadachirajasimhakhyaḥ | Kareṇumārgamālokya 264 Kasy kasmin samipseti kadachidvijaya devi 464 Karaiḥ pravifasatpuskarai- 318 Kasy ka tungata nama kadachinnishi kena api ra kana api 508
Karaiḥ nijaiḥ kumārasya 536 Kasyachid thabhāvena kadachinmatpita bhouma- 546 Karoti kutsitam karma
Kasyachchit sa mahadevi
535 Kadachinmatpita mantra- 460 Karau prasarya sasneha 468 Kasyanyasya sthiribhavo kadachinmandare vidyam
177 Karṇābhyarṇa pravartitvā
Kānsyapaṭratrayāpūrṇa
110 Kadachinmunisangha sya 167 Kaṇo tasya na vayete 205
Kākasani vrtyāso
470 Kadachill Lakshmano naga | Kaṇa lachana sampūrṇī
Kākavatparṣasu bhrantaḥ kadachits nripo dānam 164 Kartavya miti sampṛṣṭo
Kāñcanākhyaguha yām kadachitsanukampena 363 Karmano 'sya samartho 'ha- 546
Kāṭhinyam kuchayo reva kanakashriḥ saha abhyetya 172 Karmanirmūlanam kartum
547 Kātra priti raham janma
87 Kanakojjvalanāmābhū- 565 Karmabhedāt phalam teshām 326
Kārtike kālapakshasya kanakanakavigraho 336 Karma syāt ki na vā punyam
Kārtike māsi revatyām 122 Kanīyasī guṇajyeshṭhā
402 | Karmanyanadibadhdhāni
157
Kā tvam vada kutastya ve kanīyan jinadatto 'tha 423 Karmanyashta sakāraṇāni
Kantaḥ kuvalayālādi kandamūlaphalānveshi 183 Karmarībhir idam sarvam
Kanta kalpalatāram yo kanyakānām kumāram tam
533 Karmedamuchitam khyāta- 311
Kanta palpalatārōha 170 Kanyakābhiḥ śataīḥ sāī kamai vam nigṛṇasyāsī
Kanta bhiḥ karaṇaiḥ sarvaikanyām gaveṣayetveti
Karghaṭāḥ khatrayadyek- 325 Kanyakubjamāhishasya
Kanti lajjām dhṛtim kirti kalpāmaraiḥ samam sadhain
17
Kanteḥ kā varṇanā tasya kanyakashatam mamāstyatra
207 224 Kalankakshiṇate rashi 444 Kanyāhastis uvarṇavājika pilā 78 |
Kantyā kuvalayālāda | Kalankavikalḥ kantaḥ 125
Kāmakalpagumo dbhūtam kāntābhiḥ kamaniyābhiḥ kalāpī gatavānekaḥ 265
Kāmaje vyasane dyūte
102 Kapilādisvashishyāṇām
447 Kalāpe palitam prācyam
Kāmadhenvabhidhām vidyā
205 Kapīnām yūthamālokya  kalābhiriv balendu 54
Kāmayante striyaḥpums kapolaphalako lakshṇau 205 Kalāvidagdhavidyaś
Kāmarāgakathāmeva 116 Kamaṭhaḥ kukkuṭasarpaḥ kalpavallivada ven 266
Kāmaśokhabhayōnmāda kamaṭhaḥ prāktanaḥ pāpī
Kalpavrkṣañca dīnebhyo kampamānairadhovastraḥ
Kāmadishatruvitrāso 467
Kalpātītā virāgāste 80 Karam parāyaratnāni kalpānirvāṇakalyāṇa
Kāminām khaṇḍayannmānam karajālamatikrant kalyāṇavidhi paryaptou
Kāminī nīlanī rej karana trayasamyogāt
Kalyāṇabhiṣavam kṛtvā
460
Kāmpilyāyā dharādhiśo 420 Karana trayasamsanta kaviparameshvaranigadita 575
Kāmo nāma khalaḥ ko 'pi 72 Karana prāvaraṇālamb- 562 Kachchitshi vijayādhiśam
146
Kāyaḥ sarva śuchiprāyo 167 Karṇānām abhiṣṭā ye kachchidbhiṣagvage vikshya 541
Kāyavāka chetasām vṛtti 158 Karavāṇi kathaṅkāram
Kachchidviprasuto vedā
474
Kāpasthiti samādānaṁ 304 Karāgrakaraṇopalakṣya- 346 Kachchilla lokāntaram yātaḥ
Kāyādikam sadasi te vipalam 567 Karālakara vālagrā 381 Kaṣāyamatta mātangah
465 Kāranam kim tayoḥ ko cha 186 Karishyannatitaptānām
Kaṣāyavishāyārambha
542 Kāranam tīrthakṛnnāmno 187 Kari makarākīrṇa 311 | Kasmad anena bandhutva- 537 J Kāranam prakrtam bhāvi 256
5.11
166
26
256
66
سه
282 281
سه
207
156
121
552

Page #620:
---------------------------
176 266
165
2
533
10
86
160
305
Yamavidhi:
562
Mahapuraane Uttarapuraanam  karaanadwayasaannidhya- 432 / kim tena yadi sheelasya 263 . kuto dharmas tavetyeta- 460 karaanaadichchhata kaarya 554 kim dhyaanaatphaninah phaniindra-441 kuto mame ti sakrodham 361 karaanaan yapi panchaitra 55 kin kurvantyami moodhaa: 386 kunayghanatamo'ndham
124 kaasne karmaanam kritvaa 480 kim na vetsi mamaivam tvam
kuntyaa sahaakritotpanna- 346
475 kaarya karaanatogunam cha gunino248 kim pratyeyamidam neti
kunthutoortheshaasantaane
216 kaaya saadhu karishaami- 384
kundhaasaa gunaastasy 28 kaaryakaaranabhaavena kim vastvihaakshanikamanvaya- 570
kundeenduneelasankashaakaaryamityetadekaantam
kim sukham yadi na swasma- 56 kupitaa visha sammishram 422 kaaryakaaryavivekast te 266 . kim sevyam kramayugmam abjavijaya- 37 kupiteyam vina heto: kaalam gamayatah smoodya- 544 kinchitkaraanamu ddishy
kupitvaa chaeṭakaye tam 517
185 kaaladashṭasya va mantro
kuberadattamaahoo ya
544 kinchitkaalam samaasaady kaalameghamahaagandha316
kuberadingmukhobad dha- 208 kaalalabdhi samaashritya
kinchitkhinnaamivaatakshy 288 361
kumaaram tadanushaanat 507 kinchitpunyam samaavarya
537 kaalalabdhyaa samaasaady 367
kumaaram bhaasvaraakaaram 462 kaalaleelaavilavyaalaam
kinchitpradakshinikrit ya 461 kumaarah shruyataam kachchikaalasanvaravidyaadharesha, 410 kinchiddhitam priyam choktam
kumaar iti sanchintya 354 kaalaadil abdhi maasaady 388 | kintu bhravo viyogo'tra
kumaarakale nihkrante 255 kaalaayuktachaturbhedakintu naakaashagaamitva
kumaarakale poorvaanam 2e kaalaante kaaladooto va 315 kintu vidyaabalaadesha 118
kumaaratve dashaashṭau cha kaalaante kritasann yaasavidhi: kimangaastiti so'pyaah
kumaaradattapaishyasya 505 kaalaante keshavo'yaasid kimaneneti yakshe sham
kumaaramandarakaar am- 538 kaale gachchhati jeevaante 463 kim ya pratipaadyasyai
538 kumaar shrunu vakshyami
468 kaale gachchhati tasyaivam 331 kimarthamidamekatra
507 kumaarasya na bheerasti
385 kaale gachchhati satyeva 122 kimastyadhogatiyam sya
kumaaran bhaasmayashi va kaale sukhena yaatyevam 375
kumaaraayaarpayaamaasa kimasau labhyate drashtu
515 kaalo maandalikatvena
kamaareṇa samam gatvaa 360 215 kimityeshyami yaateti
226 kaashide she naṛipo 126
kumaareti tamabhyarthy 506 kimetad iti te'avoch an 483 kaashide she samaayaat kimetad iti saavoch
kumaare'sminmam sneho'bhoo- 500
528 kaashchitkaarakitaa: kaashchit 281 kimetenabhavacchaury
kumaarottiṣṭha kalyan a- 516
308 kaashchitprasvin tasarvaangaah
kumaaro'pi grihi taanu| kimeteshaam phalam hi
354 kaashmapaayaasch putraau tau kiraatasainyarupaani
kumaaro'pi tatah kinch i406
508
465 kaashaayavastra kaks haav- 267 kiraateneti sampṛṣṭaḥ 466
kumaaro'pi tadaakarn ya kaasthaangaarikpaapo'pi
kumaaro'pi pratijnaaya 466 kirtigunamayi vaachi
500 kaasthaangaarikputraṇakirtivall ijagatpraantam
kumaaro'pi ravirvaambho 504 207
501 kaasthaangaarikamukhyaaste 525 kirtistasyalata satyam ' 126
kumaaro'pi viditvaita- 504 kaasthaangaarikamevaina
kumaargavaarini yasmaakiiti shruti: stutou tasya 587
426 kaasau kim taam na si tvam
kunjaro vaarpitaalaano
334
kumbhapoornapayobhista- 368 kim kritam bhavatā pūrva
kunalavishaye suketu- 105 kumbhaaryaadya ganesho'sya 220 kim krityamatra sangraame
kundalaakhyapurare raaja 150 kumbhahaaraya yaatam tam puur kim gotrah kim gurubrahi
kutaapasavratam dirgha
264 kumbhe naanuyaata dandahaste 152 kim tena janmana tena . kuto jaanukriyet yetad
kurujaangala deshe'smin 222
7
10
340
551
383 460 308 150
28

Page #621:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:

Kurvate mam mayi prīta kurudhvamiti sampresya kuru yagam śriyo vṛddhaya
Kuru samgrahamanyadca kurmastateti santosya
Kuryuḥ kutūhalotpattim kurvatastapasouccaiḥ durghanārāle
Kurvan ghoram tapo viśva -
Kurvan dharmopadeeśena
Kurvanneṣam mahasatva-kurvan parvaśaśankābho kurvanti smāparāgāṇi kurvāṇaḥ pañcabhirmāsai-kurvāṇaḥ samayam kati prakṛtiṣu
Kulam kuvalayasyāsya kulam cedrakṣitum tiṣṭhe -
Kulanaśo'gatirmukte
Kulaputramahāmbhodheram kularūpavayaḥśīla-
Kularūpādayaḥ kena kulārogyavayorūpā  
Kule maddī bhujām jyeṣṭho
Kulocitā sughoṣā tvam kuśalāścandanoṣīrakūpam sopānamārgena kūmapṛṣṭhau kramau tasya kūlanāma mahīpālo
Kṛkavākū ca cedeva
Kṛtaḥ kilaivamedaśo
Kṛtakaḥ sahajasceeti
Kṛtaḥ putravadhaḥ svāmīkṛtadoṣo'stayam nāgakṛtadoṣo itaḥ sītā kṛtanirvāṇakalyāṇāḥ
Kṛtapaścamakalyāṇāḥ
Kṛtamangalanepaṭhyām
Kṛtamātṛpariprashnaḥ kṛtavarmā mahādeṣī kṛtavīro'bravītyāpi kṛtaśobho jagannātha
Kṛtārtha san jagattrattu
Kṛtārtho'ham kumāreṇa kṛtāṣṭāhnikasatpūjī
Kṛtopacārā samviṣya
Kṛtopāyo gṛhītvainām kṛttikābhirnīśātābhi
Kṛttikāyām tṛtīyāyām kṛtyākṛtyavivekātikṛtyākṛtyaviveko'sya kṛtyānāmupajāpena
Kṛtrimāḥ kena jāyante 207 | Kṛtrimaiṇacchalāttasmān
Kṛtasiddhanamaskāraḥ 236, 437,525
Kṛtānujīvanaḥ
Kṛtānurupavināyā
Kṛtāntavadanam sadyaḥ
Kṛtāntārohāṇāsannakṛtāprādhe bhrātā te
Kṛtābhivadano yogyam
Kṛtvā kṛṣṇam ca gopāla
Kṛtvā jīvandharastaśya
Kṛtvā tajjanitakṣobha
Kṛtvā tapaḥ samutkriṣṭam kṛtvā digvijayam jitvā
Kṛtvā'ntyeṣṭim tadāmyetya
Kṛtvā nāndiśvarīm pūjām kṛtvā nidānam sannyasya
Kṛtvā pañcamakalyāṇa
Kṛtvā pāpamadaḥ krudhā kṛtvā bhagīrathe rājyam
Kṛtvā bhavānte mandodarī
Kṛtvābhiṣecanam dattvā
Kṛtvā rājyamam sahāiva
Kṛtvā rājye'nujamnānam
Kṛtvā śarīrasaṃskāra
Kṛtvaitān buddhivaikalpyāt 68 kṛtsnakarmaakṣayo mokṣo 225 kṛśamapyakṛśam madhyam 420 | kṛṣṇapakṣe trayodaśyām
Ketumalā caladdobhi
Kṛṣṇācārya samāsādya kṛṣṇāyām vāruṇe yoge
Kṛṣṇena saha raṅgam vā kecidaṅguṣṭhamātavyam kecideva param nānā
Kecidvāmakaropātta
Ketavaścānukūlāni

Kenacit kīlito veto kenacitpathikenāmā
Kenacin muninādīta kenāpi tapasā kārya
Kenāpyayamāpāte
Keyamityānuyāto'sau
Kevalasānimānokta
Kevalāvagamam prāpat
Kevalāvagamālokitākevalāvagamāstatra
Kevaladyutiraivaṃ keśaromalavadinām
Keśavāśca nacaivātra keśavasyādimasyeyam
Keśavo'pi tamaneṣṭu
Keśānvimocitāmstaśya kailāsaparvate dīkṣām kokālo kālo kā kokīlānām kalālāpo kokīlālikalālāpākokilāśca purā mūkī koṭikākhyaśilām tasmi - koṭīrdvādaśaratnānām
Koṭīn vasahasreṣu
Ko'parādhastaveda na
Ko'bhiprāyo mahīśasya

Page #622:
---------------------------
Page 4
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
181
22
361
427
223
26
122
342
66
The fruit in the Kosha is ripe 363. What is that enmity, it is in vain, peace 436. With four-sense organs, who is this injustice, this is it
What is my Srivijaya Swami 154, with four-sense organs, he is created. Kautilya kotis, cruelty, all the enemies of the earth
With four-sense organs, the word 122, what is the purpose of Kauta, or 24, what is the father, the king, death, supplement, with four-sense organs, the lord of the sky, having eaten the earth 144, the conduct of a young celibate
What is known, the truth
481, with four-sense organs, the state of being a charana, the attainment of the fourth, excellence 112, in the form of Kouma
Sometimes, due to poetic license 478, two parts, due to the lineage of Hayagriva, due to attachment 141
The first, it exists, this is it 406, with three-sense organs, one number, in the matter of skill, Ayodhya 432
The impermanence of things 476, with three-sense organs, fire, two years, in the matter of skill, in the village of Vrddha 112, momentary, all synonyms
With three-sense organs, the side of the Ayana, it is said 237, in Kaushambi, the third birth is famous 336, momentary, solitary, bad words 176, with three-sense organs, five are said 237, in Kaushambi, well-known 343, climbing the ladder of the destroyer
137, with three-sense organs, each is specified, the city of Kaushambi, there
Forgiveness, the embodiment of the form, it should be known 456, with three-sense organs, four seasons, combined, in order, even alone, even
180
The part of the moon, or 167, with two-sense organs, fire, combined, in order, reaching the city of Paava 563, the decayed, the stained, the one born of mud 205
With two-sense organs, the increasing lord, in order, reaching his own city 546, the cessation of decay, attained
334, with two-sense organs, eight, it is said, in order, eleven-limbed ocean
The waters flow in time 280, with two-sense organs, two, eight, water, combined, in order, thus, doing penance, the earth 206, forgiveness, etc., the destroyer of karma 552, with two-sense organs, eight, six, one, in order, the strength of the body, the lifespan 558, forgiveness, etc., ten virtues 336, with two-sense organs, the side of the Indra, it is said 216, in order, reaching the house of the bird 466, throwing, the worldly
With two-sense organs, five, attaining, in order, reaching Lanka
222, milk-ablution, the end of ornaments
With two-sense organs, five, the name, in order, he who has done good deeds, he is 186, milk-ocean, and the cool-rising one
66, in order, they wander, the lords 118, the karma of fear, etc.
221, with two-sense organs, the hole, fire, in order, the audible, the word, the meaning
278, this is small, take it, it is said
545
With two-sense organs, seven, in order, thus, doing penance, the fields, all the grains
With two-sense organs, one-sense organ, knowledge
216, in order, this penance, he does 132
Well-being, Srivijaya, the lord 155, with two-sense organs, it is said, the evil-minded one, he is
507, the Bhattaara, named Domanka
With five-sense organs, nine, combined, playing, with Jambavati
Well-being, if you wish to speak 456, with five-sense organs, one year, for the sake of playing, by his own strength, the name 435, the lord of the city, named Forgiveness
With five-sense organs, one, it is said
122, to play, he requests, the foolish one 133
Well-being, the city of Kshema, another
186, with five-sense organs, the Muni, the two, angry, the two waists
373, having obtained the call of Kshema, 506, named Khara, the stain, the smoke
315, angry, by the princes, and others
[Kha]
The wicked, the bird, having done, the great, the calamity 120, angry, the brother, the son, the two
The bird, this one, with a different name 155, with seven-sense organs, two, water, it is said, angry, the two, ready for battle 453
The bird, named Indradatta 181, the eye, two-sense organs, fire, two, anger, in the three, it is said
102, the lord of the birds, taking the wheel
Eating, thus, having made an effort
171, due to anger, etc., even the son of Tapas
534, the lord of the birds, in the southern row 278, 402, eating, Narada, others, they go 284, due to anger, the mother, even, angry 460, the lord of the birds, named Asanivega
Eating, one human, this is it 152, due to anger, the friend, he becomes, the enemy 46, the lord of the birds, even, may he forgive
Eight-limbed, hand, sound, body 226, the wolf, the tiger, the faces, and so on 564, with four-sense organs, three, combined, in order
Having taken, the one who lives in the field, cruelty, arrogance, with courage
The sky, the mountain, the heap of sand 283, with four-sense organs, two, fire, combined, virtue, what is attained by you, O king

Page #623:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index

**0**
**188**
**w**
**518**
**410**
**260**
**111**
**34**
**215**
**64**

**yāḥ**

[ **g** ]  
**g**atvā tau rāmasandeśāt gaṅgāsindhuśca rohicca
**g**atvā tau svāgatim pūrva gacchatyevṁ ciraṁ kāle
**g**atvātmaparivāreṇa gacchatyevṁ kṣaṇe vāsy
**g**atyātra sukhamāsvāmbhe378
**g**atvā dviṣo'gnirājasy gacchatyevṁ tayoḥ kāle 267 gacchanto daṇḍakāraṇye
**g**atvā nandīśvaradvīpe gacchanyadṛcchya vyomn
**g**atvā niṣṭhitakāryatvāgajaḥ kaṇṭīraveṇava
454
**g**atvā padmarathābhyarṇagajarājaṁ ca vaktraṁ svaṁ 245
**g**atvā praviśya tāmucchaiḥ gajavṛhitavāhorū
316 **g**atvā'bhyarcya ciraṁ stutvā gajātpuram gabhīram goḥ 50 **g**atvā rājakulam vainateyagajādiṣoḍaśasvapna
**g**atvā vihāya sanmārga gajāriganjaya thaṁ vā
321 **g**atvā śvetavnanodyāna gajendravṛṣasimhendu
**g**atvā ṣaṣṭhopavāsena gajo nāma kiyān
**g**atvaitatpurmanviṣya gaṇinī saṁyama śrīvā
183
**g**andhapuṣpādibhīrviṣṇaganiṇyāścandanāryāyāḥ 482
**g**andhamādanakudhroṭthagani nijadivjābhiṣu prasaraḥ 555
**g**andharvadattāyā sāksāgaṇeśā daśa tasyāsan 436
**g**andharṣadattā kalyāṇagaṇeodaśabhiḥ pūjyaḥ 526
**g**andharvadattā sampṛṣṭā gatadhanaripurodhaḥ
174 **g**andharvadattā samprapya gatayojanakāgāraṁ 276 **g**andharvanagareṇaiva gatim prapātasamśuddha 316 **g**andhāvaraṇamāruhya gatījīvaguna sthāna
**g**andhādibhiryatiṁ divyagatiyuddhaṁ tvayā pūrva- 341 **g**andhādibhiḥ vibhūṣyatagatīrgacchanti pañcāpi 562 **g**andhādibhiḥ samabhyar ya gate'nantarasantāne
57 **g**andhāravīṣayakhyāta gateṣvikṣvākumukhyeṣu
**g**andhā sugandhā gandhāvān gate svāyuścaturbhāge
73
**g**andhodakaiḥ svayaṁ devyā gato'mitaprabhādibhyaḥ 162 **g**ambhīya dakṣiṇāvarti gatyantar e'pi te bhartā
468 **g**arbhasūtisamutpanna gatyādiśubhanāmāni
**g**arbhāgama dvādaśyāṁ gatvā kadācidetena
| **g**arbhādhānādinirvāṇa gatvā gamanamālokya
**g**arbhānvayakriyāḥ pūrva gatvā'caleśe saṁsthāpya
235
**g**arbhavātāranakṣatre gatvā caitravnanodyānaṁ
**g**arhaṇaṁ svadurācāre gatvā jinagṛhe proṣa
168
**g**alanti garbhastannāmnā gatvā tato'ntaraṁ kiñcit 264 **g**āḍhaṁ pāśena badhvādo gatvā tapogurum kṛtvā
**g**āndharvādi vivādeṣu gatvā tatra manohāri
**g**āndhāravīṣaye khyāto
306 / **g**āndhāravīṣaye puṣkalā- 403 146 **g**āndhārī gaurī padmāvatī
402 244 **g**āndhārī ca sutā prādu- 345 418 **g**āndhārītyākhyayā khyātā 411 **g**iryantvijayam gandha -
526 424 **guṇaguṇyabhisaṁbandhe** 480
**guṇapālābhidhānasy** 358
**guṇaprasavasanḍabdhā** 283 **guṇavatyāryikābhyāśe**
423 76
**guṇā satyādayastasmīn** 68
**guṇā guṇārthibhiḥ prārthyā** 1 465
**guṇāyaṁ bhāvuko bhāṣi** 54 541 236
**guṇā varasy te'yodhyāpureśe** 256 **guṇāstasy dhanaṁ lakṣmī** 87
**guṇināṁ niravadhyena** 167 546 **guṇī guṇamayastasy**
86 '381
**guṇaiḥ kula balādibhi bhuvi** 170 365 **guṇaiḥ prāgeva sampūrṇaḥ** 21 524 **guṇaiḥ sārdhamavarddhant** 522 **guruḥ prathamacakreśaṁ** 144 518 **guruḥ śrutadharo nāma**
262 510 **guruṇārpitam

Page #624:
---------------------------
Chapter 6
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
265
26
254
463
165
141
Taking the Mayaavi, the Chakra Sudarshana story 325 thirty-two remaining
17, 61 Taking Rohini, she remained
Chakra Ratna's origin 264 forty-four lakhs, taking pure right faith 438 attaining Chakravartihood 226 four kings here 273 taking the essence of being 
Attaining Chakravarti glory
181
Chandana and Yashasvati 484 taking, well satisfied 506 Chakra's ripening 312 Chandana and other Aryikas, zero 468 by lineage, Kashyapa's 
245
Chakra and other parts broken 321 Chandana, seeing that 485 Godhavana, the great serpent 366 Chakra weapon, then his 
Chandana, this one, from Kalpa 463 Gopura, entering the ocean 323 Chakra weapon, etc., his 
Chandana, head mixed with water 11 Gopendra, the king, his 5.4 Chakra weapon, etc., also 210 Chandra Kavya, skilled in 
524 Gomini, with Sita also Chakra weapon, from that order
208
Chandra Chula, Muni's wish, Gome, cloud-curved, etc.
Chakra, Chakra, in front 382 Chandra Prabha, named chariot, Govardhana, the fourth, another 564 Chakra, with that, the prince also 228 Chandra Mala, thus Surya Mala.
189 Gautam, I saw 526 Chakra, with that, his battle
Chandra, like his rising, Gauri, form, beauty
58 Chakra, with prowess, like 322 Chandra, I am his friend, Gauri, six-jewelled, glorious
517 Chakra, invaded, direction-circle
Chandra's rising, like wind
505 Book, two, abandoning 244 Eye, Ikshvaku lineage
Books, like a garland, abandoning 213 It shook, time, time's end 376
Slap, fist, stick, etc.
362 I will take, thus, he also 410 Four-armed force, named 256, 308
Champapur, near 
356 Villages, cock-fight 
Four-armed force, with that 
147
Champapur's lord, going 346 Village, another, equally going 367 Four-armed force, equipped 
Going, penance, excellent
278 Village, another, equally gone 
407 Four-gated, he also 
Going, like a night-sword
543 Village, Durmarshana, named 56 Four-fold, coming 
156 Last limb, whose is this 
410 Village, Palasha-kata, named 352 Four-faced, second, not 74
Going, having gone, not going, neck-cut, or seeing 
Fourth time, till 
555
Going, brought, that news, summer-sun, circle-like, fourth-faced, eye 
453
Going, in Sailpura, flower [v] Fourth knowledge, endowed 4, 36, 130
Moving, nature, crooked 136 House-maid, I will make 
Fourth, also, understanding, his 464 521
Chanara, like 
427 House, it shakes, of the crows 
Fourteen, great jewels, embryo 135 294
Bow, eighty, rising 
House, it shakes, with reason 
Fourteen thousand, said 
- 62 138 Four-way, meeting 
Bow, arrow, holder, going 
Dense shadow, all 208 Four-faced, horses, Kalki Raja 
Chamar, immortal, with these 
61
555 Dense, held, garment 
Charanahood, attaining, Four-kind, immortals, Indra's, Dense, changed, body 387 Four-kind, immortals, with 
Charanahood, also, attaining, Dense, struck, Krishna 317
338
Character, no smell, also, Four-kind, means, pure 86
106 Killing deeds, eradicating 146, 467 Four-kind, means, together 
Charming, etc., hearing 357
465 Killing deeds, destroying, Four-divided, son, etc. 
Moving, firm, straight 413 Killing, named, that killing, Four hundred, fifty, 
Picture, low-lineage, born 367 Four hundred, said 468 Picture-Kuy, named, garden 286 He did, proclamation, city, Four hundred, five, more, days 
Picture-Chula, again, his 184 He did, peace-worship, and 
Four, in, crossing 266 Picture-Padma, etc., peak-named 186 Chakra, power, mace, spike 383 Four thousand, number, said 210 Picture, in, only, knowledge 
86
53
262
464
Yoga
210 467
204
361
327. Flag, etc. 
387

Page #625:
---------------------------
## Verse Index:

17
222
241
543
257
mr
17
380
381
483
535
557
338
36
116
65
153
382
520
506
123
310
318
353
330
427
404
538
431
178
370
264
517
156
313
518
541
411
546
484
482
487
156
512
484
160
5.6
234
513
261
216
18
18435
333
123
534
254
233
167
461
181,2
356
102
34
532
328
266
361
367
211
233
565
16,160,346
365
426
405
222
150
347
165
564
263
543
38

Page #626:
---------------------------
568
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
468
168 436 167 167 167 257 220
Purda
546
210
185
513
27
123 536 415 154
226
574 455
Jnaanamya nabhijaatatva- 412 Jinopadiṣṭanirgrantha- 166. Jnaanadarśana-cāritra-jānāmyaham mahaccaasy 182 jihvālolupamālaya 226 jnaana-hīna-parikleśo jāyate nandayaśasa 364 jīrṇa-parṇavadāgaṇya
śānādiṣu ca tadvatsu jagapanayana-upaaya-jīva jīte jīvandha
jnānena tapasā jainajālalagnaiṇapotam vā jīvadyasāśca tatsarva- 364
śānopyogābhiṣṇoso jigish matpadam duṣṭā jīvandharaḥ sāhayaiḥ svaih
jneyamāgamaśabdakhyam jitāribhūbhujasyāsya
jīvandharakumārāv
506
jneyāḥ ṣaṣṭisahastrāṇi jitendriyasamāhāram
jīvandharakumāreṇa
516
jyāyānaham ajāye tvam jitvā cintāgati-vegaattā 341 jīvandharakumāro'pi
510
jyāyān haribalastasya jitvā jinendra-vapuṣendr- 137
jyeṣṭhakṛṣṇacaturdaśyāṁ jīvadhareṇa maccūrṇa- 521 jitvā jyothsnā mitakṣetrī 451
jyeṣṭhasūnovivāhena jīrghadharo'pi yakṣasya 507
jyeṣṭhe māsi kalāśeṣa. jitvā narendrajālākhya- 418 jīvadharo'vadanmūrchā
jyeṣṭhe māsyasite ṣaṣṭhyāṁ jitvā prasiddha-khacarān
jīva putrātra tiṣṭheti
486
jyeṣṭhe ṣaṣṭhopavāsena jitvā mām vigraheṇāśu jīvādyaḥ kālaparyantaiḥ 476
jyeṣṭho'tra rāṣṭrakūṭasya jitvāsyakundasaundaya jīvājīvādittvārtho 138
jyotiṣprabham kaniyānśam jinam pradakṣiṇīkṛtya 157 jīvitānte guruḥ tasya 350
jyotirvane viyogena jinam manoharo-dyāne 67,325 jīvitānte niyogena 562
jyotirloke'maro bhūtvā jinam śrīpavanāmān
46 jīvitānte'bhavaddevī 406
jyothsneva tārakādhiśe jinam sāgarasenākhyam 503 jīvitānte samāsādya 456
jvalajjvalākarālothsthā jin vadha mātreṇa 546 jīvitānte sa sannyasya
jvalatyasya pratāpāgni jinadattāryikābhyāśe 351 jīvitānte'hamindre'smin 332
jvalanādijati khyāto jinadattārthiko-pānte
jīvitāvasitau samyak 444 | jvalanādijati cāśu jinapūjām vinirvṛtya
526
jīvitāham tvayā sthān- 303 | jvalanādijati tasyāḥ jinapūjām vidhāyānu
jīvo'yamudyadupyogaguṇopalakṣya 566 jvalanādijato pāti jinapranītasaddharmājainagehe samabhyartham
jvalitacalitanethro jinapratinidhipūrva 483 jainasāsanamaryādā
460 jinasenabhagavati-ktam jainyāśca tanayo viśva
[ ] jinasenānugāyāsma
84 joṣamādhyamaham kurve 483 | tam kadācidviharārtha jināsenaanugīra 564 śātājīpandharākūta
| tam jñātvāvadhibodhena jinasyāsyaiva tīrthe'gyau 105 jñātāttadehasammeyaḥ
388 | tam tadā bhoginīvidyā jinārhan-nandana-bhyāśe 26 jñātātmānyabhava dhika
tam tadāvāpya deve-ndraḥ jinendrajana-nīmāirām 203 jñātvā tat-tasya vaimukhya
tantriḥ parītya panditvā jinendrabhavane bhūtām 432 śātvā tābhyām sthitam sthānam 518 tam daṇḍayitumutkro-dhajinendravadanendū-ttha
jñātvā parśurāmīya 226 tam dhyānā nal-nigdha jinendrasyālayāstasta
jñātvāpi tanmṛti bhūpa 10 tam nirīkṣitumāihiṣṭa... jinendrānahmanye-dyu
jñātvā vibhaṅga-jnānop- 262 | tam nirūpya paricchedo'jinendro'pyabravīdittham 352 jñātvā saṁsāra-vaimukhyam
| tam niśamya mahākālaḥ jineṣu ganānātheṣu
167 jñātvā hiraṇyavamaita. 547 tam manohāriṇam dṛṣṭvā jinoktadharmaśāstrānu- 462 j

Page #627:
---------------------------
## Verse-by-Verse Order of the Verses

**Verse Numbers:**

222
526 126 505 560 503 285
362
416
471 416
134
534
252
220
236
404
411
468
121
4:1
474
548
81
464
562
324
187
187
447
241
150
264
176
145
116
547
154
366
271
521
463
418
526
151
507
65
281
556
356
336
266
336
224
460
363
506
524
304
230
122
560
163
487
418
381
463
412
267
346
484
461
562
531
45
361 361 324
207
366 275 455
161
438 358 171 266 252 241 172 237 344
346

**Verse Contents:**

* **Verse 222:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 526:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 126:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 505:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 560:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 503:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 285:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 362:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 416:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 471:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 416:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 134:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 534:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 252:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 220:**  (No information provided)
* **Verse 236:**  Seeing him, there was no opposition to him.
* **Verse 404:**  Then the birth of Padmavati.
* **Verse 411:**  Then, knowing the truth, seeing him, the story of the child.
* **Verse 468:**  Then, after that, the Jina's.
* **Verse 121:**  Then, by their marriage, he received the complete wealth.
* **Verse 4:1:**  Then, from the Pandavas, Subhadra.
* **Verse 474:**  Then, the birth of the Tirthankara, the eldest of the merciful.
* **Verse 548:**  Then, the merit, not the sin.
* **Verse 81:**  Then, the king of birds was pleased, he told the story of his son.
* **Verse 464:**  Then, he returned in the month.
* **Verse 562:**  Then, they were met by Rama.
* **Verse 324:**  Then, fearless, Bhima wanted to kill him.
* **Verse 187:**  Then, the city was brought together.
* **Verse 187:**  Then, you should quickly call him.
* **Verse 447:**  Then, he obtained the time, etc.
* **Verse 241:**  Then, the Pugedhasa came to get.
* **Verse 150:**  Then, you too were by someone.
* **Verse 264:**  Then, at the time of the wheel's rotation.
* **Verse 176:**  Then, he came to the west.
* **Verse 145:**  Then, going a little further, he heard the words of the maid.
* **Verse 116:**  Then, he fell from the end of the kalpa.
* **Verse 547:**  Then, he returned, why?
* **Verse 154:**  Then, he was very greedy, he should be abandoned.
* **Verse 366:**  Then, hearing this, he rejected him.
* **Verse 271:**  Then, from that time onwards.
* **Verse 521:**  Then, in the month of initiation.
* **Verse 463:**  Then, hearing this, my lord, this.
* **Verse 418:**  Then, she was pleased, good.
* **Verse 526:**  Then, the city of Dwaravati.
* **Verse 151:**  Then, hearing this, he searched for another.
* **Verse 507:**  Then, the conduct, fasting, etc.
* **Verse 65:**  Then, he who lives for two oceans.
* **Verse 281:**  Then, hearing this, see the non-attachment.
* **Verse 556:**  Then, the glory of Nagadatta.
* **Verse 356:**  Then, the unevenness of the earth.
* **Verse 336:**  Then, hearing this, he was angry.
* **Verse 266:**  Then, he was armed with an army.
* **Verse 336:**  Then, he was not suitable for the god.
* **Verse 224:**  Then, hearing this, Sumati said.
* **Verse 460:**  Then, with appropriate love.
* **Verse 363:**  Then, the king named Nalin.
* **Verse 506:**  Then, hearing this, he too was angry.
* **Verse 524:**  Then, with love for all beings.
* **Verse 304:**  Then, he ate everything.
* **Verse 230:**  Then, hearing this, who sent him?
*

Page #628:
---------------------------
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
36
456 138
323
167
443
322
446
510 167 227
548
375 222
142
368
342
306
382
Then Megha Ratha, kingdom - 160, that pilgrimage, ocean-like, then jewels, the rest
| That, beloved, difficult to obtain. Then, the taste-enhancing water. 560
That, by sattva, etc., by which, then, the king, to the city, going 516
That, essence-filled, deep-meaning, then, the kingdom's rule, to the son
That, even to the offender
87 Then, to the enemy's city, he went.
That, by you, completely achievable
That, truth-shining, then, the young, the Jina-forms 275
That, truth-faith, attaining, then, the forest, embracing 
That, truth-meaning, determination, not attaining, then, the vajra-weapon, falling 185
That, cage, various, that, then, descending, in this country 446
That, lord, named Damita, then, descending, in this year
That, foot, then, attaining, then, the praising-words 37.
That, examination, for, coming, then, destroying, the wicked enemy
That, examination, standing, in the arm, then, various, the boundaries:
354
That, lotus-foot, touching, then, ordained, renunciation.
125
That, beloved, precious, from, then, of his, enjoyment-objects
That, merit, ripening, then, I, sent, by that
306
That, city, establishment, for, then, forcefully, coming
That, Purana, then, I will speak, that, neck, the letter, taking
355
That, city-lord, in the sky-traveler, that, story, on the occasion, people
432
That, city-lord, moon-bright, that, I will do, by which, his 186
That, city-lord, enemy-killing, that, welfare, of, Indra
That, city-lord, moon-kirti, that, time, sky-traveler, pair 297
That, city, palace-peak. That, time-appropriate, actions 436
That, previous-birth, connected, that, time-appropriate, path 203
That, previous-and-later, connection. That, time-appropriate, that 536
That, conviction, arising, that, princess, to be taken 280
That, region, himself, going, that, done, by the sun, it goes
366
That, influence, special, that, done, unbearable, itching 475
That, proof, strength, brilliance, that, moment, arrived, Indra
That, purpose, intending, that, moment, confusion, seized 26.
That, fruits, understanding, self, that, capable, of, my, offense
That, fruits, understanding, that, field, measured, ability
There, what, born, even, this, that, field, measured, strength-lack
168
There, some, younger-brother, you, that, field, selling, desire
There, Kinnara-song, named, sky-traveler, mountain, king
431
There, Krishna, embracing, that, circumambulated 242 382,454
There, Kaurava-lord, that, then, even, all
There, gandhoka, his, that, pilgrimage, even, chakra-lord
948
There, birth-interval, hatred, that, pilgrimage, interval, chakra 134 | There, that, all, scriptures
582 254 406 344
There, that, maid-servant, one, there, that, maternal-uncle, moon 151
There, that, presence, by, 520
There, those, similar, all 202
There, betel-leaf-garland, ending 168
There, that, Balina's, messenger 306
There, divine, happiness, enjoying, there, wealthy, named, king
437
There, settled, day-night
463
There, Nemi-son, Satyabhama's 383
There, merchandise-women, seeing, there, previous, done, merit
510
There, happening, story, there, growing, I
There, Brahma, earth-lord, there, enjoyments, many, enjoying 341
There, enjoyments, according-to-fitness 430
There, illusionary, battle, there, night, done, protection 467
There, to be spoken, of, humans, there, twenty, times-measure 433
There, frightened, all, there, branches, sub-branches, own 233
There, weapons, all 227 250
There, sorrow, not, to be done 253
There, sixteen, times-measure 222 451
There, brought-together, fate 484
There, own-birth, connected
334
There, standing, himself, dharma 340
There, by, those, worshipped
202
There, trembling, cave, etc.
357
There, artificial, not-born, there, brought, from, place
There, first, sixteen, provinces, there, experienced, good, enjoyments
There, other, also, jewels 110
There, not-shining, even, this
468
There, was, in, the, lotus-pond, there, immortal, talk
There, understanding, to inform, reason, there, eighteen, half-life 518
202
276
276
246 263
20
122 62
mram
K MEG
56 465 281 368 425
66
468
56
347 545

Page #629:
---------------------------
##  Verses and their Order

**Verse Numbers:**

601, 82, 435, 216, 122, 347, 221, 157, 504, 453, 281, 171, 480, 111, 82, 478, 262, 54, 124, 280, 536, 536, 365, 255, 26, 272, 266, 365, 405, 275, 485, 183, 77, 488, 262, 226, 287, 365, 486, 366, 155, 426, 256, 132, 20, 226, 22, 508, 27, 262, 474, 157, 226, 341, 5.8, 272, 346, 73, 88, 126, 303, 366, 279, 468, 502, 371, 146, 161, 54, 152, 516, 228, 146, 183, 306, 365, 416, 502, 258, 438, 534, 261, 461, 206, 185, 280, 518, 412, 236, 422, 400, 380, 188, 534, 417, 435, 183, 183, 306, 155, 68, 281, 265

Page #630:
---------------------------
602
Then, at the time of the puja,
From then on, the girl's
From then on, the pilgrimage
From then on, you, girl,
From then on, arrogance
From then on, the king of snakes
From then on, in this world
From then on, Salya, etc.
From then on, he went to the desire
Then, in the form of a Brahmin
Then, with devotion, he bowed down eight times
Then, adorned with ornaments
Then, he went to the beautiful garden
Then, he was a member of the assembly of the gods
Then, the king of the Malaya country
Then, the best minister, the citizens
Then, the lords of the nectar-eaters
Then, all the nectar-eaters
Then, in the battle with Rama
Then, the eloquent one, having obtained fuel
Then, seeing this, what?
Then, seeing this, Hari became angry
Then, the worldly ones, having obtained
Then, the remaining Pulastya
Then, a certain Vidyadhara
Then, the Vidyadharas, the earth
Then, having made the Indra
Then, Visakhabuti also
Then, they were amazed
Then, Sachi, the great queen
Then, they came for refuge
Then, Sita's cold treatment
Then, the Yaksha in Indra's abode
Then, he honored
Then, all things
Then, the king was amazed
Then, residing in Saketa
Then, being learned in the scriptures
Then, the lords of the gods, having obtained
Then, the commander-in-chief by name
Always, Surpanakha came

531
260
12
505
557
430
101
553
506
10
23
551
76
- 251
131
336 | This was said by him
178
That simile
That means and helpers
That very thing should be explained
That very flower, only
That very thing is the purpose of man
That very thing is for all things
461
358
In the great Purana, the Uttara Purana
235
322
178
251
That very thing, taking with anger
That very thing, approved by all
That very thing, from the Uttara Antya
That very thing, cowardly, Surpanakha
322
That very thing, two celestial beings, somehow
282
208
That very thing, conception
That very thing, he raised
That very thing, pilgrimage, be made
That very thing, pleasure, anger also
That very thing, he called together
That very thing, the forest, his own kingdom
That very thing, the dancer's story
That very thing, the lords of the blink of an eye
That very thing, tired of enjoyment
That very thing, auspicious things, loudly
That very thing, Madana, invincible
3
Then, he did not listen
Then, they reached their own place
Then, in the battle with Harit
Then, etc., having bowed down
Then, the proximity of the senses and objects
Then, ascending his bed
Then, having heard what you said
Then, exceeding the intellect
Then, in the great palace of Upungama
Then, the fruit of the birth of this
Then, having heard the news of the celebration
Then, the auspicious ones at his birth
450
417
203
408
265
340
384
80
116
228
157
425
276
288
That very thing, Yamameri also
That very thing, the victorious mountain
That very thing, Shuraseno also
That very thing, he was happy
That very thing, he, the great king also
That very thing, he also, the king's hope
260 | Then, let them both do
488
310
Then, having come, taking him
73
380
Then, having come, those two gods
188
466
Then, having come, he fainted
511
121
Then, having come, the Indras 247, 333
522
467
Then, having come to my village
Then, the lords of the blink of an eye
516
126
230
46
Then, having come, he bowed down
Then, having come, the lord of the city
Then, having come, Saraswati, etc.
264
524
Then, he, the one called Nighoṣa
80
Then, he, the god of heaven
Then, having obtained even a little
534
515 Then, having called, he was united
262
576
162
563
Having gone, he examined him
46
Then, going to his house, she herself
Then, all the wealth taken by him
104
143 | A Kshatriya was in that lineage
126
Then, the very strong one, raised from the grip
286
Then, having heard the proclamation
154
Then, such as mantras, tantras, etc.
48
Then, born from seeing
414
Then, seeing the fruit of the gift
67
Then, from sending the messenger
413
167
117
168
214
116
234
266
202
Then, he began the six parts
Then, indifference arose
Then, following the path he had gone

Then, fearsome, sinful
Then, there is no time for us to speak
410
Then, the playful act of caressing and fondling
Then, knowing this, he was consumed by anger
360
૪૪૪ 342
Then, the story of the past lives
Then, they both settled their caste
251 | Then, all things are unsuitable
213
56
66
164
202
531
452
B
362
226
104
384
516
36
536
524
551
171
516
168
556
Then, seeing this, the arrogant ones, naked
Then, seeing this, the embodied ones, infatuated
266
Then, of the goddess, Nandayasha
362
Then, he was brought secretly by

Page #631:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index

60
505 185
166
246
363 408 242
403
231
146 143 132 488 160
10 258
506
202 | 288 | 486 | 133 | 151 | 535 | 540 | 155 | 366 | 267 | 314 | 417 | 260 | 512 | 327 | 154 | 364 | 302 | 470 | 534 | 76 | 402 | 365 | 557 | 488 | 331 | 516 | 162 | 340 | 226 | 56 | 433 | 517 | 362 | 242 | 323 | 388 | 522 | 206 | 322 | 152 | 476 | 270 560 | 22 | 246 | 431 436 | 361 | 486 | 465 | 273 | 455 | 53 | 260 | 507 | 401 | 264 | 457 | 253 | 501 365 | 166 | 225 | 15 183 | 464 | 268 451 287 | 234 | 264 301 136 410 538 426 | 252 | 35 | 67 | 378 76 | 223 | 414 118

Page #632:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:

604
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana
27e
Shaka
Gapa
346
2
150
267
108
Therefore, he should not be prohibited - 252 | The goddess who pleases him 362 | His son named Sushena should be given to him 143 His son Shatagrīva
278 Repeatedly poured over him 366 Therefore, my word is this
His wife is named Subhadra 466 Hearing this legendary, from that great earth
His enjoyment and consumption is the only one.
That wicked one wants to appropriate her 181 His mother's affection 368
Like a serpent, she came - 262 Abandoning his anger in that moment
184 His mother's name is Sumitra
To marry her, he came - 256 At that moment, he arrived 548 | In the auspicious place of his 46
Know that goddess on his left
What should I do about this? 384
Seeing her, full of beauty, in that guru, then well-established 550 | As long as I do not go 69
Addressing her with pleasant conversations
511 In that region, all the people in his kingdom, like the sun 332
And with affection, that work - 524 In that famous Nagapura 278 His word-arrow dispersal 575
Such was the nature of those - 422 Born in that, 545 | Suitable for his Brahmin family 160
From his companionship, in that calamity, peaceful 153 By the order of Shakra, in his house
As much as self-care
266 On his passing, of that
His emptiness, one or two - 220 Dying in that very city
Extracting her, his heroic fire 166
Those in the self-choice hall 357 Even in that city, Narada also His sixty thousand
Became the ascetic vow in the end 222 In that very city, Shesh 512 His sixth fast 335 In that same city, Shakti-
Assuming the form of an ascetic
274 186 By his truth, they rain His former friendship in that
The hermitage of the ascetics became 360 430 Of his Somaprabha and others
55 The ascetics and compassionate dharma
275 In that, the king comes 262 In his hand, the self-sounding
The ascetics thus addressed 271 In that minister, the king 262 Her dark creeper, the maid - 505
By them, he became the lord 536 Told by her own attendant In that six-month- 56,245,460 By the radiance of her limbs, a gem-lamp
Going to search for her at night 46 In that Siddhi forest
Bringing her, the prince 504 His infinite intelligence, the goddess
Bringing her, the lord of the earth Those desirous of happiness in that
260
Her refusal That, therefore, he gave the divine gem To him, no other
I will bring her to kill 414
163 With all the virtues of the house, To him, the merchant chief another time 468
Even Taraka, the long-lived youth
Climbing the banner-staff, To him, the requested was given Her capacity to bear the burden
116 48
Just as the time passed, In that very northern direction Her beauty was Suprabha, the goddess
165 482
As much time passed, In her, the next Bhainya His beautiful-necked
220
By the rule of the day, His time is this, indeed 560 To despise him
316
474
So many Kevalins: 247 There, the desire for time and age 462 She narrated that
So many Kshatriya fires 220 Who to see him, it was said Her next one is someone 181
So many western- 236,335,387 His birth festival, enough 216 On her northern side
340 For the fulfillment of the three goals
So many went to the Ashoka-named forest 14. He had a son born to them Her goddess is named Subhadra. At that time, bringing that
148 482
2 . His goddess is named Sumimā
His Sushena
125
Those two were offered by me, he also 253 His name is indeed made
In the consent of that goddess 166
160
116 His son is Padmavati 503 Some other next to him 181
Like the rising moon 231 Embracing his feet 184 In her, another I, Indra, did not 28 To test the minds of those
251
386
142
286
542
82
356

Page #633:
---------------------------
##  Sloka Anukrama (Order of Verses)

605
356
523
306
474
547
300
157
140, 186
315
570
483
454
532
544
563
102
440
258
84
250
24
466
250
337
126
340
385
214
376
533
320
24
163
61
263
560
188
533
207
67
362
262
264
434
42
515
81
466
171
268
210
104
410
368
386
126
133
462
408
255
328
415
254
2
342
260
540
475
364
302
364
303
475
144
503
462
171
221
556
530
84
408
375
235
332
253
128
422
234
543
254
458
227
276
127
45
357
357
66
258
156

Page #634:
---------------------------
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
Mm3.0
460
238
266
222
166
305
310
The size of a Trasarenu, he is confused by the Trasasthavara, thirty years of the fall of the sun, thirty hundred thousand years. Thirty autumns, thus thirty thousand years of life, thirty thousand years of life, thirty lakh years of life, three times he has been worshipped, three times he has been saluted, the hero of the three times, the three parts of the jewel, the lord of the three parts, the three parts decorated field, the lord of the three parts of the kingdom, the gods of the three parts, the lord of the three groups, the three worlds swallowing, the three-pronged holder, the divine, the three-pronged holder, the three-backed bow, the conch, the three-backed, the three-backed, the proud, the three-backed, the cruel, the three, the Shiva, the three lakh Shravakas, the five three lakh Shravakas, the three lakh Shravakas, the three lakh Shravaka goddesses, the three worlds, the lord, the three years, the three-storeyed, the lion, the three-storeyed, the womb, the three thousand and thirty, the three months, the Jina Kalpa, the conqueror of the three worlds, to conquer, the Jyaashaan darshan, the one who has come here, from where have you come, from where are you, who are you, and you, the goddess, Kubera's
267. You are the soul, etc., the objects, 178. The father of Damitaara, the bearer of fame, 172, 120, the sky, the suppression of the wicked, the protection of the good, 181, the compassionate Muni, the mountain, the end, 457, you are like my life, the relative, 477, the compassion, the knowledge, the liberation,
141, you are the truthful one,
273,
The sleeplessness, the seeing, experienced by you, 523, the removal of the obstacles, the wonderful,
202, the three, the worship, as instructed,
The ten-throated, the lineage, the arrival, 246. The work desired by you, 315, the ten, he remembered, the elephant, this, 122.
The work done by you, for me, 470, the ten virtues, before him, 206, the fault of the kingdom by you,
The ten, the eternal worship, 348, 135, the work done by you, the real, the unreal, here,
The ten months, the end, the resident, 433, the enjoyment, the happiness, by you,
The tenth, from this, the famous, 561, 384, the sin, protected by you,
The tenth, the Magh month, 127, the work done by you, alone, the workers,
The teacher of Dasharatha, 574, 455, the one spoken by you, but if not Sita,
The ten, the enjoyment, the enjoyment,
136, the self-instruction, to be done, 523, the strength of the ten-headed, the defeat, 320, the hearing, the singing, the advice, by you, 287, the ten-headed, also, the crossing, 300, the birth, the coronation, the festival, the mountain of the gods, 434,
The ten, the subject, the king, 482, 315, the lotus feet, the dust, the six, the eight, 571,
The ten-mouthed, the peace, the peace, spoken, the feet, the feet, the wonderful,
The staff, the umbrella, the balance, and, in your city, to be done,
503,
The staff, the wooden, the weapon, the place of your vision, and,
The staff, the approaching, the vassal, 24, your face, the mirror, seeing,
To give, the old age, knowing, 357, your word, the speech, the Dharma, yours,
To give, your own, the refuge, the sorrow, 464, 146, your marriage, the expenditure, to do,
385,
The given, etc., the ninety, the saying, the sorrowful, the happy, also, 568,
The given, the blessing, what is the purpose, 168, you, bowing, the best, the praiser, 63, giving, the elephant, the ugly, you, me, to think, the desire,
Giving, the victory, the name, you, the people, the love, the increase,
Giving, that, the means, 387, the eighth day, the woman, the world,
263,
Giving, to them, the sons, 242, 378, you, today, I will join,
286,
Giving, the satisfaction, the wealth, the attainment, 246, the dwarf, respecting, the suitable, yours,
Giving, the skilled, the name, 100, you, to bring, I will try,
520,
Giving, the food, the donation, these, 162, 163, 434,
You, the sages, respect, 570, giving, the kingdom, the good, the worshipable, 250,
You, the desired, the girl, to see, 165, the Daksha, the king, your sons, 125, 128,
Giving, the victory, the Bhadra, 60, the south, the Dhaataki, the part,
Giving, the worship, with devotion, 538, you give, the supreme, the courage,
The tooth, the limb, the elephant,
62, 156,
He gave, the two teeth, that, 113, the teeth, whose, the food, becoming, 227, 344, holding, the bean, the black, the color, 350, this, not to be said, 365, the Damitaara, Yama, and, one, 171, showing, this, the wonder, 233, 176, the Damitaari, the assembly, in the middle, 168, showing, he said, the sage,
360

Page #635:
---------------------------
Showing sse, even though he was bitten by the fierce spring season,
Bitten, lost, and born with a burning fuel-like inner giver, and the knowledge of power,
You are not a giver of praise,
To give the gift of the sun's son, worship, and other gifts, worship, penance, and conduct,
I am not a family worthy of giving,
Giving, conduct, fasting, etc.,
From giving, the suppression is explained, in which giving is the giving of two prices,
On the third day of Nanda, etc., in the Bharani constellation,
Bringing the sun to rest,
On which days, after the past,
On which days, after the past, on the day of Sammed Shikhar,
44
13 =
The initiation rituals, taking the eight initiations, the liberation path initiation, the tamer, self-obtained,
116
260
With dinars, the attainment of,
175 | Seeing the given,
76
434
Poverty is fled far away, I will give, thus the kings, said by the elephant's cheek root,
75
35 The shining wish-fulfilling tree, suffering is experienced there,
463
Suffering by one's own karma, suffering, the fire of suffering,
66.
60
Suffering, suffering, the cause of suffering, suffering, the fruit, the humble,
With the gods, in association, the learned, the Nigama, the divine, all tastes, food,
488
361
163
566
416
The order of the verses, beginning with the letter,
185 | The initiation, the auspicious one, the initiation, to take,
386
The initiation, the dense chariot,
Two-day fast, having fasted for two days, by the two-day fast,
Which days are those, at the beginning of the day, and at the end of the day,
Some days there, 280, 521, difficult to cure,
Some days,
161
Some days, having passed,
226
Thus, many days,
321
335
202 Harsh words,
553
46
262
328 The fort guards, the city, Lanka, difficult to conquer, the Kalinga king,
184
Difficult to obtain, restraint, conduct,
42
542
Difficult to overcome, the enemy of evil, the assembly, 42 162 | Difficult to overcome, the evil destroyer,
360
The initiation, the Jain initiation,
222
Difficult to understand, association with,
130
The initiation, the sixth fast, 22, 30, 66 Difficult to obtain, wealth, from merit,
462
The initiation, the Mahendra, having taken,
The initiation, of Sagar Sena,
Long, there, happiness, having enjoyed, long time, dirt, having endured,
74, 82
236
Suffering itself, happiness, considering, 432 | Difficult to understand, scripture, hearing, arrogant,
26
542
In the ocean of milk, on Mount Meru,
The wicked, compassion, giving up,
Evil intention, the king of the gods, the evil, fierce form,
350
365 | The foolish, facing the evil,
454
53
Divine enjoyments, the shining, having enjoyed, divine glory, human glory,
In the presence of divine women, having stayed, with the gift of divine ornaments, the directions, looking, me, seeing, 161 The evil path, by the haters,
160
Difficult to subdue, the hater, by him,
Difficult to bear, your, evil mind,
448 Difficult to conduct, from my beginning, 402 Difficult to conduct, the unmeritorious,
166 | Evil deed, refrain from, therefore, 163 Evil suppression, the remaining,
60
The position of the evil, the year,
Difficult to stop, the enemy's anger, breaking, of the beloved,
Evil-speaking, etc., all,
348
250
103
300
The messenger, Marichi, by name, the messenger, to me, having taken refuge, the messenger, also, quickly, going, the messenger, of Rama, having gone, 423 | Far away, the sun's rays, not changing, yours, from afar, Kapila, seeing, 281 | Desiring Lakshmi, thus, having said, these, friends, etc., all, arrogant, difficult to conquer, king, fierce,
51
73
In the week, there, also, the effort,
Seen, possible, to remove, the seen path, the arrogant,
Having seen, the king of the birds,
558
317
Difficult, the path, of others, easy, to approach, 70 Difficult to conquer, were, as they were, difficult to attain, the cause,
46 470
301
50
67
123
137
151
327
576
530
385
65
166
311
Seen, that, may be, if the root,
Having seen, by some means,
Having seen, patience, near, her,

Having seen, the Jainendra images, having seen, him, there, by him, the name, having seen, him, there, by falsehood, having seen, him, the parents, his,
Having seen, by them, from where, auspicious, having seen, in the constellation of stars, the lord of the stars, having seen, them, thus, of all,
286
316 | Having seen, the two-horned, having seen, the truth of dharma, having seen, the hidden knowledge, having seen, you, today, the serpent,
346
271
Having seen, him, wonder-stricken, having seen, him, his own, god, having seen, them, the sage, said,
607
472
315
553
283
407
555
156
374
62
100
440
160
255
515
284
186
371
305
170
477
467
484
276
403
222
362

Page #636:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved in English Translation:

In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana:

1. The minister was seen by the devas and became deluded. 
2. Your body is devoid of impurities, and your speech is... 
3. Seeing the exposition of the Muni, the Devi, seated on the Garuda-yantra, became distressed in accordance with the two faults.
4. Seeing (the Devi) with appropriate affection, the Devi, who was afflicted by the Tittha, brought the Dhukumara.
5. Seeing (the Devi) with proper hospitality, the entire retinue of the Devi was purified by the Dhuti.
6. Seeing (the Devi) with aversion to form, the Dhuti's luster shone forth.
7. Seeing and hearing, he discerned and went to that Devi.
8. Seeing the Sagara-sena, the Devi was (present) in that assembly of five hundred.
9. Seeing the dreams, their fruits were...
10. The Devi Yashodhara was his...
11. Seeing in the garden, the Devendras always took him for enjoyment.
12. Some Deva was present.
13. The Devas and the Devi Andhakavrsti...
14. The enjoyments brought by the Devas...
15. Even the Deva's life span has an end.
16. The Deva-adhishthita, by name...
17. The Deva became indescribable.
18. The Deva is the ornament of my lineage.
19. Worshipping the Devata, with their feet...
20. The Deva Vichitracula...
21. May this Deva Virajina be for the worlds.
22. Afterwards, the Devas and the Devi...
23. The Devis, the chief of whom is Svayamprabha...
24. In the Devi Tugmeghamalinya...
25. This Devi is the resident here.
26. The Devis also spoke the divine words...
27. The two Devis by the merit of donation...
28. The Devis took their own form.
29. In that region, the Sarasamuchchaya, the king attained the state of the Deva-loka.
30. There is no Desa or Marga...
31. Knowing the two Dvijas...
32. Go, the one bearing the name of Dvija...
33. In the Desa called Gandhila, there is no...
34. The Devas, indeed, gave assistance.
35. The Devas and the Devis are innumerable.
36. The Deva's command, if there is, then go...
37. The Deva Vasu-deva and Devaki...
38. The Deva, even though he is the hero of the Devas now...
39. Worshipping the Devata as Deva...
40. The Deva's lineage...
41. The Deva-datta ascended...
42. The Deva-daru forest, the flowers...
43. Certainly, the Deva-dundubhis...
44. The chief Deva-dundubhis...
45. The Deva-deva, with the entire Indra-devi...
46. This is the Deva-devi's permanent residence.
47. Who can describe the Deva-deva?
48. The innumerable Deva-devis.
49. The Deva, the Devi, and the Devas.
50. The Deva, the Devi, in the Dhara-chakra...
51. The Deva-vidyadhara-adhisa...
52. The army of the Deva-vidyadharas.
53. The Deva-sena's daughter was born...
54. The Devas, indeed, gave assistance.
55. Seeing the arrival of the Devas...
56. The second auspicious occasion...
57. The Devas and the Devis are innumerable.
58. The Deva's command, if there is, then go...

Page #637:
---------------------------
On the second day, they did not fight.
In the second section of the Dhaṭakī.
On the second day, that is, on the second day, in Sāketa.
On the second day, the city of Nandana, the increase of the two-backed mountains.
With a two-year period.
A time like two oceans.
A time like two oceans.
Two ocean-like past.
Two ocean-like, you.
410
23
100
94
65
65
Two-backed, with a first jewel, three-sectioned, two-backed, intoxicated elephant, with two hundred thousand Śrāvakas. 60, 100, 131
Two-world enjoyment, false perception, from the enemy or not, truth.
Two-six yojanas in length.
166
316
In this island, Mandara, east. 267
In this island, of Sindhukūṭa, there is an island, among them, called Laṅkā.
Two-fold difference, from the disease.
316
Making the enemies afraid.
To frighten the enemies, they said loudly.
317
86
33
77
To leave from that island.
The origin of Dvīpāyana.
Half-island circle, or.
In the island, Jambūdra, known.
In this island, in the other Videha.
In this island, of the bird-earth-bearer, in this island, here, of the Videha.
In this island, also, in Vinatā.
In the second island, in the east.
In this island, in the Kośala country.
In this island, in the southern row.
In this island, in the southern part.
In this island, in the first, east.
In this island, in the northern part.
In this island, in Kauśāmbī.
In this island, in Puṣkalāvatī.
In this island, in the east Videha.
In this island, of the east Videha. 213
In this island, in the east Videha. 143, 333
In this island, in the Bhārata region.
84, 85, 216, 342, 347,
363, 366, 536
448
406
361
356
420
The order of the first letters of the verses.
In this island, in Bhārata, the aerial beings.
In this island, in Bhārata, the Gaṅgā.
In this island, in Bhārata, in the Campa.
In this island, in Bhārata, the country.
In this island, in Bhārata, the jewel.
In this island, in Bhārata, the year.
82
Two-fold nature, six are said. 423
Two gods, coming to the earth.
Dual battle, with that, they conquer.
Two-eight causes, obtained.
47
218
106
403
401
2, 15, 20, 61, 331
In this island, in Bhārata, the Śāli.
In this island, in Bhārata, the lion.
In this island, in the Magadha country.
108
407
[Dha]
177
Dharma, indeed, the other dharma.
454
Dharma-born, Bhīmasena, also.
88
He told the dharma, the essence of dharma, of the sage, rightly.
444
128
Dharma-giving, etc., strength, also.
From the attainment of two dharmas.
Wealth, in giving, intelligence.
Dhananjaya, of this, all-glory, Dhanamitra, was, in the pride of wealth, youth, and beauty.
This, of wealth and glory, by bondage.
132
454
266
375
Dharma-sin, freed from, other.
In dharma, may there be profit for you, today.
"Dharmashila," thus, fame.
282
Dharma-white, sun-rays, yours.
Hearing the good-will of dharma. 136
Dharma, etc., then, wealth, from wealth.
Dharma, etc., increase.
From this dharma, they will obtain.
Dharma-nectar-filled, speech.
Dharma-nectar-filled, rain.
Dharma-wealth-desire-scripture.
Dharma, from the rain of the clouds. 362
In which dharma, born. 163
Taking interest in dharmas. 537
Dharma, in the Jaina, indeed, this.
52
545
362
Dharma, here, liberation, the path, here.
351
147
56
6
Wealth, etc., the god-protectors, named.
348
162
All, who know the art of archery.
458
With great wealth, she.
154
The king, with a good chariot.
122
14
337
Other than the good, she is not to stay.
The archers, they used to shoot down.
From the earth-king, having learned from his father.
The earth-king, he became, having died.
The earth-end, made a casket. 166
They gathered the earth-Lakṣmī.
404
144
The earth, enjoyable with happiness.
In the house, all, with devotion.
106
Dharma, fame, greatness, also.
Dharma, he united with these.
2
In the water-house, in the forest, pleasant.
Dharma, is there any here, this is not proper. 578
Running, the chance of fate.
510
485
130
285
320
176
106
276
28
126
Entering dharma-meditation, those two.
In the causes of the destruction of dharma.
In the destruction of dharma, of the good, destruction.
The destruction of the root of dharma.
28
Dharma, compassion, how is this.
Dharma, is compassionate, in dharma.
Dharmic, strength, self-born, also

Page #638:
---------------------------
610
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraana
28
466
318
251
Vikashtmishtatityetat 160 | Na chetad darshanam saayam 302 | Namaschamaravairochanoast 377 Dhigastu samvruter bhavam
246 | Ya chedam vibhagyava 301 Na matsarena na krodhan na 382 Dhig bhogan idrushaan
Na chedinabhivamseka
06 Na maam pratiprayogo yam 477 Dhimaam dhanamihaahatu
Na chedav surendratva
| Nanitaakhila bhoogala dhimasya gunaah prapya 88 Na chauryena vina toshah
Namitaasesha deveindraau
206 Dhiyo'sya sahajanmana kushalinaah 480 Na jaane twaam vilokyaadya 302 Na manamitasamaraamarapati | Dhi pourushcha vijayarjanameva 567 Na jnatah kah karo naama
Namebhangavatastheertha
378 Dhimaanasasi yadim am twaam 532 Na jnaanaat santi daanaani
Nayasha. Kaaryasiddhaschaartha 304 Dhimaanu dikshate pashyan 554 Na tayogriho yaanam
Nayans chaturo maasaan 438 Dhiro megha ratho naama 164 Nataakhila khagaadhisha 268 Na yuktamiti bindha 462 Dhoopanu lepanai malyai 4.4 Na taavadartha kaamaabhyaam
Naraka yaatayaktroru 535 Dhamadhwajasakho'sthaasnu 52 Na tu maansa dakam deyam 164 Narakaayu prabhruti asht 270 Dhamo palambhanaadagni
Na tyaktum shakya ity aadi
476 Narake ghoradukhaanaam
470 Dhritadandapravrittitvaad
Natva kim bahuno kten
308 Narapatiriha naamna
135 Dhritaraashtraya gandhaari 346 Na daanto'yam nribhir danti
Naralakshanashastrasha
526 Dhritavrudhaakriti vikshya 375 Nadimukheshusambhoota
246 Naraadi vrushabhah pure
134 Dhritishenaya magaajyam 500 Nadisaras tatakaadi
533 Nare dvashatsut a diksha 364 Dhairyasadhaara nirbhinna 253 Nanaadaanakasanghaato 461 Narendrabahu bhih saardha 36 Dhyaati dhayantra nairmalya 301 Na nirvritasya samsaaro 467 Naro'rdhaabhyadhikaaran 558 Dhyaanadvyasamunmoorchita 135 Na nepathyaadibhir bheda
201 Nartaki varvarityeka
167 Dhyaayantam vikshya vanditva Nandagopa samaape'sthaan
Nartakyo. Prabhavo'yam 171 Dhyaayan vairagyasampatya Nandagopasya putro'sau
Nalinaprabhanaamaabhoo
76 Dhruvam tannarade nokta Nandagopo'pi tam baal
Navakevalalabdhisho 135 Dhwajadandagra nirbhinna 292 Nanda jagadaananda
203 Navakevala labdhi ddh
240 Dhwajikritanishaatogra 226 Nandane nandighoshaakhye 401
Navakootyabdhi maano kta 73 Dhwani reko'pi diyo'sya
Nandaadhyaadisamaaneet 526 Na vach kau kalavant au 166 Dhwani schen nirgatastar ma 205 Nandaadhyaaya dadurbhoori 516 Navaprasoota sankruddha
451 Dhwastam tvaya pravalapapavalam parashcha 566 Nandaasandarshane naasau 124 Navamaasaan yath oktan 80 Charato muktipatah puruprabhrti bhih 212 Nandigraamanivaasinyah
Navamukta phalalola Nandi bhooti schaturthastu
561
Navame maasi vaishaakha 214 Na kaachicchedrushi striishu 300 Nandipeno balah pundariko 230 Navame maasi sampurna 435, 460 Na kaamanee yakam kame 35 Nandiishvare mahapouja 164 Navabhedam jinoddisht 488 Nakalah sansootau bhraantva
Nandyavarta grihe ratna 460 Nayojanaavistaaram
376 Nakula sahridayascha 424,45 Napums u yadi tatraasti 522 Navarandhra rtuvarsheshu Na kevalo'yamityehi
| Na pratiichhatu bhrityatvam 306 Navalakshaadhikootiishu Na konomi stasty eva | Na praapyate'tra samsaare
Na vaachyah prithagu tsaaho 22 Nagaram prakshit kaarakata 152 Na buddhimaan na dubuddhi 251 Navaapi nidhayah poojya
207 Nagare padmini khete
Nabhashavarakumaraanaam
267 Navaapi vidhina sannyasyanto Na gopinyam na kiyo va 462 Nabhasah shuddharoopasya
Navaabhyupamasantaane 122 Nakand ivam nijapraana 466 Namas talagatau devakumari 333 | | Navaaralitanuutsedho
435 Nakshatraani graha.staarakacha 266 | Nabho nyaroonadushnaams hu 381 Nava vayaat
Nave vayasi dikshitva 364
370
26
366
471
385
463
425
366 251
27
163
351

Page #639:
---------------------------
Slokanamakaradyanukramah
611
Kacad
63
66
532
261
54
52
328
207
436 74
514
546
435
60
Na srnosi vacah pathyam nastakarmastako'bhista na santi sahajastasya na sthasnu na subham kincin na sthiram ksanikam sana- na snanam bhojanam svapona hasyam kurutaivam bho na himsa na mrsa tasya na hi mulaharah ko'pi na hi hitamiha kincin nasty akathanlvam me nakandamrtyavah santi nakamati praja nyaya nagato ravana kena nagadattam vivanyc nagadattamasau naham nagadattastada rajjunagadattengitam jnatva nagadattena papena nagadatto'pi kanyaisa nagarasca vibhutyainam nagaradupakartabhunagarcbhyo mahihhaire nagavidyasca vidyanunagasriyam ca dautya nagarvitarasi tvam nagasravihitakrtyan nagah seseu tannaman agasuraih sada kruddhanagi nagasca tacchedat nagendraskandhmaropyanasamam smarati pracyam natihrsvo'sya samsaranathas sandavanam prapya nathetl rava tathyanatho nathakuiasyaika nadhaiasyidhakhya syanananapaksimrgaih kalananapu^paphalanamnraprasunasusvadarianabhavanasamklrne
311
Nanavidharcanadravyaih 552 nasugvo'nena ko'nyasin na 146 nanaviruUatavrksa- 84 nasmakam deva dapas'sti- 107 166 nanalahkaraiam'yokti- 488 nastika papinah kecid nanasurabhlpuspopa
Nasti jatikrto bhedo 476 64
Nasti bhattarakasyasa 303 nanituSalika bhumi
Nasyascittvam tvayabhedlnanopaypravlno'ya- 472 622 nanlarayah param tasya
Nastyato nagamo naiva 407 napannapannabhogena
542 nahamahaiayamiti
240 nabhi^ pradaksinavaita
Nihkhandamandalas'candah 255 406 nabhudasyas'tato'lpo'pi 467
Ni prabharn nihprataparh ca 320 511 namagraho'pi yasyacam
Nihpravlcarasaukhyadhyo 198 namaksarani tasyasau 360 nihsankadigunanstan van
164 67 namadlcaturartheau
266
Nihsesanyakkrtaghati namuscen kecananadi- 388 nihsapalna sriyah so'bhut 16 543 namrlamsorni^asana
Nihsavadyo'sti dho'nya- 26 546 namna dhanapatlh yata 118
Nihsvedadhasannama 546 namna nandityaso
352
Nikaie rajimataykha- 424 546 namnahhavatsakopanam
Nikrtya kanyam srlsenanamna narapatirdatva
Niksatusvaraevoccai 546 namna narapatistasya
Nigrhitakasayari 551 namna vibhisano jato
117
Nigrhitumiyopramsu 256 nayakabhyam tatah sugriva- 314 Nigrahanugrahah tasya
126 252 naradam silayadchady
Nigrahisyami mrtvainam 487 275 naradah sa tadagalya
418
Nigrahena grahah karo 42 naradah taltada jnatva 277 Nijajanniadine caka- 215 422 naradastaisamakarnva
Nijajatyanurupa'ye 507 423 naradastadviditvaisu- 400 Nijataja'vadhihyapta 186 naradagamanacapi 421 Nijadlksabane sastlie
215 256 naradagamahetuiica
416
Nijapapadadyad dlrgh 436 naradena samaruhya
416
Nijanaile samaga'cche naradenaiva dharmasya
Najiarajyena samkranta
275 246 naradaktanapakarnva
275
Nijattavase^ena 562 narado'pi vanam yato'da- 266 Nijagananav^ttantam
224 narada visikharudo
Nijahvayabhimanena 380 321 narl ca narakanta ca 188 Najabhimukhanasanam 266 nahatanam vighataya
Nijasane samaslnam 24 27 nalap^ate lapasyasya
27 Nijotkrstanubhagana- 21 455 nayato mandalam raho
Nitantamathakamarlh
271 201 navabodha^ kriyasunyo
Nityatvasyapacarepa 476 navidagdhascagopala
Nityatvepi tayoh
178 268 nacoccacchastrayathalmya- 264 Nityamasvendrasamanl- 258
485
238
267
482
474
58

Page #640:
---------------------------
612
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
282 5.3
448 566 226
202
»
360
304
46 462 548 555 131 141 212
30
540
Nityaalokapura Shrima- 361 / Nirnaamaka Malabdhauktam 365 Nishiddhaapi Tau Tena Nityaalochitamantrashakt yanugata-174 Nibharsayanto Voddanda- 316. Nishiddhavishayaanstarasma- Nityotsanaah Niraatanka- 200 Nibhoomichhidramchhidra 166 Nishkampa Tava Shuklatamupgatam Nityodayasyachenna Syat 51 Nirmama Nirhankaram
180 Nishkashayatayo Baddha Nityodayobhudhaadheesha 536
Nirmapya Jinpoojaasch 544 Nishkaaranam Trunalayancha Nidaanam Manasa Moodho Nirmoolyaakhilakarmaani 36
Nishthitaa Vipalaaneti Nidaanadoopito Baalatap 167 Niryaatameti Vaishamya 274 Nishpannmaaraavastuunaam Nidaanamakaageejivitaante 124 Niryaatisanhatashlakshma 500
Nisargaadvaavano Drptaanidaanashalyadoshena 326, 327 Nilepo'mbudamaago 137
Nistrimshashabda Khangeshu Nidhaya Munipadaabjanirvaabhimatam Yash
Nih Swedatvaadinirdisht
280 Nipatyaakirtibhiirmaatu- 355 Nirvaanagamanam Shrutvaa
12
Nihmaaraabhoobajeityuktaa Nimittairashtadha Proktai 557 Nirvaana Prarthana Tesaam 436
Nihatya Ghaatikarmaani Niyuktaa Darshayanti Sma 226 Nirvaasito'ham Nirbhaya 313 Nihatasakalaghaati Niyojya Swaatmaje Rajyam 240 Nirvighnam Yajnanivritti 276 Neetivikramayorlakshmi Nirankusha Na Vairagayam
Nirshinnaa Sa Nivrittaaryi. Neetishaastreshu Tatsnehanirachinvanscha Bhoopena 
Nidhi Samsriteh Shanti- 183 Neetvaa Payodamaarge Na Nirdhaaksheedadhikshipya 314 Nirvisheshopade sho'ham
Neetvaasvagurusamipyam Nirantaraaya Samsiddhau 257 Nirvisya Tadgataan Bhogaan 401 Neetvaikavarnataam Sarpa Nirantaroshnanishvaasa- 516 Nigatritayodhbhooti- 576 Neelaadimiva Gangaoru Nirastatadgatasneh 327 Nivegaat taapasobhootvaa
222
Nrikhecharasuraadhooshanirastatimiraatopo
Nirvedakaaranam Kinchi- 385 Nrityatkabandhake Sadya Nih Gakarotpurattasmaanirvatah Samsootau Deergha
Nripan Nivedya Sangruhya Nireekshya Tatrachalinya 483 Nivi shyo'dgamukho Veero
Nripan Saabhinivedyaatmanireekshya Rathaanureta sya
Nivishtam Tam Samaakramya Niruddham Labdhanirvegam
Nripan Swamrityumaashankya 533 Nivishto Manasaalocya Niruddhasarvadurvrittah Nivrittimeva Sammoha
Nripah Kadaachidaasthaani 457 Nirudhyataamiti Preetiyaa Nivritti Vratashabdartho
Nripah Sudarshanodyaane 275
244 Nirupyendravacah Samyak
Nripah Surendra Dachaakhya 165 Nivrittyakhyaam Samaaruh ya Nirgamayya Tato Jain
Nripachotoharaih Shravya 541 Nivrittyagatya Saketam Nirgame'tha Kumaarasya
Nripamaavedayat Swapnaaniveshya Nijarakshaayaam Nirgrantho Neerajo Veet- 206
Nripastayaikashayya Nirjitaa Praagvidushvinyaa
Niveshya Podanaadheesha 153 357
Nripasya Meghanaadasya Nirjitya Dasharaya Sa 131 Nisham ya Magdhaadheesha
Nripasyekshvakuvanshasya Nirjitya Shrinkhalaakrant
Nisham ya Yaamabhe ryaadi 547
214 Nripaat Swapnaphalaitushtaa Nirjitya Sindhuraraati
308
Nishaayaah Pashchime Yaame 465 Nripaat Bhadraasanaaroodhaan Nirniya Dharmasadbhaavam 337
Nishitaah Pavanopeta- 266 Nripen Saha Sarveshu Nirdishtanch Maya Spashtam 466 Nishumbho Maarakoriinaam
231
Nripe'anubandhavaira Sa Nirdoshaa Diyataam Veene- 504 Nishchayavyavaharaatma
555. Nripendra Kh echaraadheeshainidohundaakramenasa- 362 Nishchitam Kaambhogeshu
26 Nripairdeeksaam Samaadaaya Nirdhanaih Paralokaarth
| Nishrito Raavana Shoury- 256. Nripo Dhanapatistasya Nidham Ya Yasya Nijajanmani 83 | Nishchelah Kritabhoovaso 136 Noopo'pyaha Katham Tattva
365 471
266 254 320 224 203
552 463 161
276
256 351
20
543
557 245
46 403 337
20 231 505 110 148 166 588 274

Page #641:
---------------------------
Shlokanam Akaradyanukramah
21
388
15 351 556 318 320 958 267
262
311
133 212 376 332
121
225
454 302 436
303
460
Nripo Megharatho namna netragocaramatrakhilanetre vilasini snindhe nedurdundubhayo hrdyah nendriyaratmanastriptinemy-antare khapancasvaneyanityabravit Krishnam neya shriragini vasyanaite shaktyaa nirakartu nai chet pravrajishyava naimittakam samahuyaa nopamanastayoh kamo nyadishannagratas-tasmaanyadhaccane tadadaya nyadhadekaM prasaryoccainyadbodhayan samastam tat nyayarjitarthasantarpinyaayo nripah praja dha
[ pa ] pake punah samutthattu pakshadavartharupe pakse citrakhyanakshatre paustavatsahasrabdaipancakalyanabhedeshu pancapalyopamapraante pancaprakarasvaddhyaya pancabhir badhyate mithyapancabhih sadvataih pujyah pancamah shuradeva-akhyah pancamavagameshaam tam pancamavaarapaaraattapancamushtibhirulluncya pancaratnamayam ramyam pascalakshasamarajyapancavargasahasrabdakale pancavahayashtapascaamipancasamvatsagatitau pancaamimaddhyavartittvam pascaapyaaradhya te'bhuvapancashadvisahasrani
351 | pancashaddhanuruchchhayo 285
pancashalakshaapurvayuh pancascaya samapapyam pancottarashatodditai
pattake samyagaalikhya 435 pattabandham svapunyena 370 pattabandhe'sya sasya
pathacchatratrayasyasya 266 patanti sma punasceti
patanmadhurasonamishral53 patih kanakapungkhani166 patih padmarathas-tasya 356 p.tah pavanavegakhyo 265 patibhaktyaa nisargaatma358 patibhiksham dadadaveti 506 patimeva na te tena
patidhanarathas-tasya patirjayandharas-tasya patirdacharathas-tasya patirmahaba-lodyasya
patishyati tato viddhi 468 386
patyuh kinnaragiitasya 456
pathi svabhyastacastrani
padmakhandapure shreshti 163
padmagulmamakhilaih stuta
padmanabhascatraiva 541
padmanabhah suto jatah 156
padmaniiva tadakarnya 136
padmarajastata padma388 padmaleshyah shvasanmaasai18 padmaseno mahisho'tra
padmanandakari bhaasvl208 padmalayamukula-kula385 padmavati ca kolinnyam 130 padmavati ca devyo'mu207 padmavatiinimittena 220 padmavativiyogena 545 padmavat-yaa dvitiyasya
padmavasyaasca putro'ya
padma'stharanur na bhaatiya 216 | padmottarahprathamajanmani
126 papraccha so'pi naiteeshu
paratejaamsi te tejo 100 patraapyevamevaiibhi
parapandivannanyaih 483
parapraneyavrittitvaa351
parapreritalvrittiinaam paramatmapada praptaparalokamanushthatupara-strigrahana shaurya
paraspara-nukuulyena 458 paramirshaatra ki yuktam
radhyabhuriratnatvaa512 pararthagraha-nam nama 380 paraai yaddhana loke 161
paraya pancadha proktam 364 parabhavam praprapto 185 parabhavati maameva 517 paraavagadham samyaktvam 128 paraavrityaa kaa
paraa vaishyasuta sunu270
paricchedo hi pandityam 356
parintushya nripam shritya 545
parityajya tapah praapta 108 parityaajayitum brahi 75 parinirvanakalyana
paripidayitu balam
pariprishte munishvaaha 202 paripraaptodayo raamo
paribhutipada neshtya88 paribhramanamet-acce
paribhramya bhave bhuuyah 166 paribhramy karau triptau 577 parivaarajana drishta 503
parivaraishca sa pratyag 683 parivrajakadikshayaah 301
parivrajakadokshayaam
parivrajakadikshayaa345 | parivrajakamargasya
parishvajyaanuyujyaan parikshitavyah so'smaasu parokshya satyaa samphaly-a-
486 478 162 263
367
285
67
81
474 268 163 287 516 80
337
446
266
423 | padamasyaa
286

Page #642:
---------------------------
614
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
81
424
555 361
Paritaam shinshwaadamaajapariita shivikaam chitraapariito bhavya padmaanaam pare cha parita praapu: pare chaa aschadayah praapan parena tasmai bhoobhartaa pareyu: paapkarmaanau paredhu samaye paanipareyu: vatsadeshasya pareohimagiryadripere nistaarakeshvartthaapare'pi doshaa: praayena pareshaam praanaparyantaa: pareshaam vaasyaroopaadi parnaladhvaakhyaka vegaaparnaadivasanaa: kaalaparyatanbahubhih saadh paryaaya nartitam prekshya paryaayaveva sarveshaam paryaayo raajyabhogyasya parvatam vasturaaj cha parvatastadviparyaasaparvataakhyo vidhii: rge pavatoktam bhayam hitvaa parvatoddishta durmaarg parvatopi pitrusthaanaparvatop'yajashabdena parvataau mesharoopena palayat nijastanaat palayaamaano maanushya palalaavaa saaveshitya palashanagare naag palyopamaayushkaalante pallalvoshtaa: prasunaadhya pavamaanaatmajam vaachya paschaatpanchashatai: saardha paschaatprasaritaamaangulii paschaadantarmuhurtaayu paschaavyaavarnayaamaasa paschaannandapurare nandapaschaatparachhutkootyabda
266 paschime divasa soma khete 42 pinditarshidvilakshesh: 385 pashyaataanyaani cha svairaam 160 pindikritachatu:shashti- 131 387 pashyan svadevyaai raadhaayai 346. pindikritatrilokt
42 pashya punyasya mahaaathmyam 462 pitaraam tam mahiipaal
435 256 pashyaitau kritavedinau
pitaraam vanaraajasya
516 366 pashnaadilkshanah sagon 272 pitaro tasya soudharm: 40% paakam prakalpayaamaasa 358 pitaa gandharvadattaaya 505 385 paakashaasanamukhyaasch 206 pitaa tu putramadbastu
486 466 paandavaah samyama praapan
pitaamusya prabhaavena 370 paatum pravishtastham vikshya
pitaasyaastadane rantu
513 380 patitaanaam paraih sukshma 381 pitu: kaivalyasampraapti
106 paati tasmin bhuvam bhoope 87 | pitu: maranavrittaantaam
227 paati tasmin mahim naasid 16 pitruvyo'pi chyutastasma- 85 paati yasmin bhuvam jishno
pitrulekhartthamadhyaaya 266 165 patraapatravisheshaanabhijna: 246 pitrusallalitou baalau
patheyam durlabham tasmaa- 367 pitrusthaanaparityago paaniyam khananaadvahni
pitraa te me'anyadaa kasy 366 371 paapam kalpaantarastthayi 312 pishtakiNvaadisamyouge 236 467 paapadharmaabhidhaanaa 158 peedaa tilaatasikshan 445 167 / paapaanubandhikamen. 344 peedito'yam madanguStha 161 274 paapaapaapopalepaapa
piitaambaram samuddhRitya 370 273 paapaabhirogbhadrasya
ওও peenaavagronnatau susthau 206 263 paapabuddhirmayo'avaadi 466
piitvaa svabhava sambandh
53 paapasvapatina satyabhamaa
puNDarikaschiraam bhuktvaa
231 276 paapaastu mul yuddha na
525
puNDarikas tathaa puNDariko 188 paapishtha'sahamaana'sau 487
puNDarikaantapurusho 564 paapishthau shrinaditee re 186
punyam tvayaa jin vineyavidheya 567 paapenaanen maamsena
punyagho shanakriyaks
punyapaapaphalenaapi paapaih kvaapi na jiyate'yamiti 5
474 535 paapaih samaanashoolaanaam
punyaprasaadhanoupetaa
455 386
punyavaanastvayam kintu
68 463 paaranaddivase tasmai 386
punyashriyo'yam ajayat 404
paartaakhya mahii shasya 222 paaripanthikaranmaarge
punya he gupineyaanaam 310
465 166
paalakastasy hema:bho 403 3.5
punyaajjalayate pati 462 paalako maara ko veti
punyaad dridharatho dirgha- 204 318 paalaniyau tvayaa bhar
267
punyaammaadaa sampannaa 313 137 paalayannyadaa kaantaa 278 punyakabiijamavalambhya
paavani stutyataa niitvaa 57 punyodayaatkramenaapy 168 paarveshtiirthasantaane
punyodayaat samudbhut23. pinottunngajataajuuta
284 ! punyodayaat suroop adi
274
267
420

Page #643:
---------------------------
##  Ślokāmāmkārādhanukramaḥ

**615**
**54**
**260** parṇava
**68**
my
**113**
**351**
puṇyodayo ditān bhogān putraṁ pitāpyanudyogam putrapautradibhiḥ śrīmān putrapautradibhiḥ sārdha putrasnānavāsāne'yaṁ putri kāstasyā sapta'san putraṇānena sādhamputro bhūtvā'sya bhūpasya pumānekaḥ striyaścānyaḥ punaḥ kumāra evaika punaḥ pitṛnideśena punaḥ puraḥ ka gantavya. punaḥ puro gamisyāmi punaḥ pravṛttasangrāmāḥ punaḥ prāktaṇarūpasthā punaḥ śrīvijayodaprākṣī punaḥ sa viṣayāsakta punaḥ snānavinoḍāvāsāne punaḥrabhyetya ratnāni punaḥjinamatikṣānti punaḥmunyāśramaṁ gattvā punaḥniranukampaśca punaḥvihṛtya saddharma punaḥtadeva yāsyanti punaḥbayorabhū yuddhaṁ puraṁ cakradhvajastasyā puraṁ pratyāgame satya puraṁ praviśya cakrasya puraṁ praviśya bhūpokta puraṁ praviśya sadanaiḥ puraṁ vinarasañcāraṁ puraṁ viśvāvasustasyā puraṁ surendrakāntāra puraṁ saumanasaṁ nāmapuraḥ sannihitam dṛṣṭvā puragopuraniryaṇapuramekaṁ tanusthityai purarakṣakamahūya purā caiṣu vyatoteṣu pugaṇaṁ tasyā vakṣye'haṁ purāṇabhūpamāgasya
**350**
**28**
purāṇamapi sanmārga
**66** | pūjyapāda tvayātraiṣa **283** purāṇashrutasambhūta
**472** | pūrayanśaśihamsāṁsa purātanamidaṁ śāstra
pūrṇacandraḥ parityajya **112** **346** purādītiṛthakṛtkāle **107** pūrṇamāsyāṁ ca puṣya **130** **500** purā pūrūrava bhūtvā
**456**
pūrvakoṭimītābdāyu- **561** **352** pugahitaḥ punaścāsmai
pūrva tālapurādhiśo **246** **472** purī prāpayya kāntāṁ svāṁ
| pūrvajanmasmṛtermegh
**115** **362** puruṣavratasampanna
**412** pūrṇadvādaśalakṣeṣu **265** puruṣārthatra yaṁ cai
**316**
| pūrvalakṣadvayātmāyu **535** | puruṣārthatra yaṁ tasminne
| pūrvavairānudhēna puruṣottamānāmā ca
| pūrvasambandhamākhyāya **522** purūravaḥ priyāsyāsī- **444** pūrvāṅgāriṁśatinūnalakṣa **22** purūravāvanādhiśo
pūrvāṇāṁ paścime bhāge **468** **381** purūravaḥ surāḥ prācyakalpe **564** | pūrvāṇ lakṣayā hīnaṁ **523** pure tasminvaṇimukhyo | pūrvanupūrttyā vaye'haṁ **336** **165** pure'tra kanakādike **66** pūrvāparavirodhādi
**76** **541** pure pāṭaliputraākhye
**555** pūrvāṣāḍhe māghamāse
pūrvāhe janmanīvātra **384** pure'bhūduत्तरśreṇyā **186**
**236**
pūrvopaṭṭavratasyaiṣṭaṁ pure rājagṛhe pūjyā **108**
**554** **404** pureva purudevaṁ taṁ
pṛthak tribhedanirṇātiśakti- **76**
**203** pure śvetavīkānāmni
pṛthak pṛthaktvaṁ nākh ye yaṁ **364** pure siṁhapure khyāto **336**
pṛthakpṛthagbahutvena
**562** pure'smin puṇḍarīkiyaṁ
pṛthivīsundarī nāmnā **137**
**522** **25** purodhasi kramātsarvān
pṛthivīsundarīmukhyāḥ **558**
**236,325** **421** purodhāḥ rathapatis senā
pṛthvīpathapravṛttāny **207**
**420** purohitastadākarn ya
pṛthau tasmin raja kṣobhe **163** **326466**
**316** purohito gṛhapatis **24** **516**
pṛṣṭvā tāṁ prāktaṇam vṛttaṁ **486** puṣkaradvīpa pūrvāddha
pṛṣṭa vā vijñāya tatsarva **71,175**
**226**
pṛṣṭau sahaiva gattvāsau puṣkarāddhendradigbhāge
**461** **280**
potapra sthāna kāle'syā puṣkarāddhendradigmeru
**541** **551**
potabhūtaṁ bhavābhi tattā puṣkalaṁ prāgbhavāyātaṁ **486**
**312** **22** pu

Page #644:
---------------------------
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
265
522
267
-
"
2
484
Nxxm
557
to reveal his own 445. Having abandoned the battle of light with the image-bearing,
| the image-bearing is to be obtained, scattered and thrown
203
holding the image-bearing, Bhima made the kingdom
rejected, he, the thief, by nature, your son is foolish
forbidden.  Do not, by nature, you are very wicked 436
established as the law of the established, excellent divine enjoyments
to establish in the womb, from the washing of the mud 166
defeated by the enemy's army, having fallen, he came to Saketa
wait for me here, having stayed, the people, he ate
in the western region, the protector of the people, the enjoyer
125
the knowledge that is being perceived, the protector of the people, the king 152.  The one who is directly not contradicted, the great king Prajapati 148, 453
in the disturbance of the people living at the ends, the son of Prajapati, in this 147
he spoke, the lord of Lanka, for the sake of protecting the people - 283
what is the proof of this, it is not clear, the great queen,
the proof, its fruit, and that, the law in the form of desire
the mental impulse has returned, the law in its own form
having returned, I will do, the knowledge of the law, thus said 412
having returned, he made that prince, the peace, to be achieved
being close to being unyielding, the law-water-consecration-
71
of those who are close to being unyielding, the law-power-strength-possessed
the lion-moon also said, the law-power-strength-prosperity
rising up, Yama-like, bowing to her, his own story
303
having risen up, by the king of the earth, bowing, with his head at the feet 464
going against, broken, bowing, he stood, the brahmin
475
the reason that is to be understood, by the words, bowing, he also, those feet
304
she also desired, being satisfied, from the devotion, having heard then
263
first, the king was born, bowing to those two deities 340
giving, eager for food, by the roaring, etc., to her
485
giving the kingdom to his son, the power-banner-waving
the sage Pradyumna, make it right, the power, the enemy of whom 140
the birth of Pradyumna, the power, the rest of whom are perfected
452
accepting, from where is the wind
the daughters of Pradyumna, etc.
522
accepting, the salutation
506
the main nature, mostly, accepting, the mind-turning-
536
from destruction, there is no crossing, like the moon's ray
having taken refuge, in the past, this, the moon's ray, of other women 47
having taken refuge, knowing that, the opponent, from him, there is a fight
having fled, seeing him, having taken refuge, by me, to him 357
seeing, with the arms, showing, to the people
| he goes, thus, in happiness, his
257
124 | the army, having drunk, the name-
163
42 bowing, worshipping 336 346 awakening, with great joy 333 the awakening of the great, womanhood
awakened, with a happy mind 127 awakened, by the instruction
220 267 the awakening, of the fainted, like
133 the lord of the mountain-peak 223 the king named Manjan 67 the lord of the city of Prabhakar 170 476 in the morning, sixteen dreams 67 Prabhavati, the talkative
165 the sight of power, is good 264
the power of this, I see- 346 505 abundant-offspring-humble
288 466 O lord, accept, from these four
the lord, of the Ikshvaku dynasty 248 486 the playful-offspring-scattered 506 the proof-seeing-throwing 140, 326, 473 534
the proof-ground, of the word 456 the proof-word, or 112 the playful ones, are all 370
from joy, obtaining the king 280
for the joy, of the son, here, they went, their path, evil
your knowledge goes 264 468
he goes, thus, in that time 241
the action-done, of the husband, the increasing-fortune
46 entering, the elephant, his 420
entering, that, considering 407
entering, that city, there 416
entering, lost-sleep, 532 entering, his own proper place 145 entering, downward-paths, all 346 entering, the house, alms
422 261 having entered, that god
having entered, lost-self 450
having entered, giving food 206 136 having entered, spoken, with jewels 421
48 18 276
466
224 362
234
73
71
521
486
180
140
261
353
520
362.

Page #645:
---------------------------
## Verse Index and Terms

**Verse Numbers:**

486, 216, 376, 116, 423, 270, 31, 254, 515, 520, 378, 82, 565, 417, 81, 246, 204, 102, 248, 554, 426, 173, 165, 474, 553, 455, 134, 571, 221, 301, 86, 526, 156, 367, 460, 200, 157, 461, 27, 518, 464, 41, 85, 525, 40, 435, 366, 263, 407, 208, 364, 366, 322, 186, 417, 313, 450, 370, 353, 486, 425, 124, 231, 177, 465, 26, 364, 278, 431, 114, 121, 117, 118, 535, 55, 438, 22, 411, 433, 218, 165, 300, 263, 450, 266, 216, 331, 22, 264, 314, 389, 574, 416, 456, 300, 507, 343, 168, 375, 357, 22, 266, 352

**Jain Terms:**

* **पुष्पद** (Pushpad) - A type of flower
* **प्रजानामेष रक्तस्वात्** (Prajanamesha Raktaswat) -  Blood of the people
* **प्रागासीद्धरिवर्मनामनृपतिः** (Pragasiddharivarmnamanrupati) - King named Siddharivarma
* **प्रवृत्त्या दीयते पापं** (Pravrittya Diyate Papam) - Sin is given by action
* **प्रागासीदमृतरसायनस्तृतीये** (Pragasidamritarasayanastritiye) - The elixir of immortality was in the third
* **प्राप्तगीर्वाणनिर्धाणप्रवृद्धतेजसा यूना** (Praptagirvanirdhanapravriddhatejasa Yuna) - Young ones with increased energy due to the determination of Girvana
* **प्रागुक्कैकादशोपास** (Pragukkaikadashopas) - The eleven previous
* **प्राप्तवेगोद्धतौ तस्मिप्रवृद्धरागप्रदेष** (Praptavegoddhatau Tasmi Pravridhdharagapradesha) -  With increased passion in that one who has attained great speed
* **प्राग्जन्मकृतपापस्य** (Pragjanmakritapapasy) - Of the sin committed in the previous birth
* **प्राप्तापमानेन रुषा प्रलयः प्राणिनामे** (Praptaapmanena Rusha Prayalah Praniname) - Destruction of living beings due to anger caused by insult
* **प्राग्जन्मसुकृतायेन** (Pragjanmasukritayena) - By the good deeds of the previous birth
* **प्राप्तावशोकदत्तायां प्रलयः प्राप्तकालस्त वा** (Praptavashokaddatayam Prayalah Praptakalasatva) - Destruction when the time has come, or when given to Avashoka
* **प्राग्जन्मार्जितपापस्य** (Pragjanmarjitapapasy) - Of the sin earned in the previous birth
* **प्रासोऽहमिति शंसन्तं** (Prasahomiti Sanshantam) - Saying "I am a hero"
* **प्रलापाक्रन्दरोदादि** (Prapaakrandarodaadi) -  Talking, crying, weeping, etc.
* **प्राग्भूभुजः प्रथितराजगृहे** (Pragbhubhujah Prathitarajagruhe) - In the famous royal palace of the previous king
* **प्राप्नुवन्ति सुखं स्वर्ग प्रशमपरमकाष्ठा** (Prapnuvanti Sukham Svarga Prashamaparamakastha) - They attain happiness, heaven, and the ultimate state of peace
* **प्राग्योऽभून्नृपतिर्महान् धनपति.** (Pragyoabhunrupatimahaan Dhanapati) - The previous king was a great wealthy man.
* **प्राप्य क्रमेण ध्वस्तारिंप्रशमय्य किमस्थाने** (Prapya Kramena Dhvastarim Prashamayy Kimasthane) - Having calmed down the destroyer, what is the place?
* **प्रागविश्वनन्दीति विशामधीशः** (Pragavishvananditi Vishamadhish) - The lord of the Vishamas, called Vishvananda
* **प्राप्य चूड़ामणिं मूढः प्रशस्तवनामानं** (Prapya Chudamani Moohdah Prashastavanamanam) - Having obtained the crown jewel, the fool, whose name is Prashastavana
* **प्राघूर्णकविधि विश्वं** (Praghoornaka Vidhi Vishvam) - The universe according to the law of the Praghoornaka
* **प्राप्य तन्निजभृत्यादीन् प्रशस्ताशस्तभाषासु** (Prapya Tannighabhrityadin Prashastashasthabhasasu) - Having obtained his own servants, etc., in good and auspicious words
* **प्राघूर्णिकोऽहं दृष्ट्वेमां** (Praghoornikohom Drishtvemam) - I, the Praghoornika, seeing this
* **प्राप्य द्वारावती

Page #646:
---------------------------
618
Mahapuraana Uttarapuraanam
552
104
204
365
402
103
65
Priyamitraaya Putraaya
Phalgune Maasi Chitraayaam 37 | Bali Talprahaareṇa Priyamitro'shtamo Dharma 351 Phalgune Shuklasaptamayaam 64
Balindraabhidhaya Khyaato Priyaajani Subhadraakhya 352 Phalgune Shravanae Krishnaa
Balindreṇapi Tam Drishṭvaa 242 Priya Jayaavati Praapta
1 [v]
Balena Mahata Yoddha 516 Priya Tugvanrajaasyabajraayudhe Samaaropy
Balo'pi Tadviyogottha- 104 Priya Vasantaseenaapi 183
Baddhaḥ Simharathaḥ Karma 363 | Bahuvo'lyaayusho'bhuvam- 465 Preetaḥ Preetiṅkarastatra
Baddhadevaayushonyaayu
472 Bahishtvaya Na Gantavya- 355 Preetiḥ Saivanu bhuutiśca
Baddho Bahuvidhairbandhe- 455 Bahiḥ Sthitaḥ Kumaaro'sau 487 Preetiṅkaraḥ Pure Charya Badhya Tatkaaranaiḥtiirtha- 213
Bahubaahuḥ Sahastaaksho
20 Preetiṅkaravane Sarvagupta- 67 Baddhvaayuḥ Krodhalobhaabhya
Bahubhiḥ Saha Sampaapy 250, 408 Prautiṅkaraapi Nivegaat- 183
Bavaneetavate Desha
363
Bahuyoniparibhraanto 120 Preetaatitisamutpannaḥ
Baddhvaa Balinamuvruttaṁ
356
Bahuni Ratnaanyadaaya 378 Preetaaya Shodashamaanaabhi- 281 Badhvaayuraapa Drishmaaya- 427 Bajino'tra Samuccchinn- 321 Preetaaya Suravaraiḥ Saarddha
Bandimaagadhusataadi
353 Banapaata Pareshaañcha Preyasi Tasy Nandaakhya. 365 Bandhaschatuḥkaaraḥ Syaat- 244 Baadhaabhaavaadarakshatra Preyaan Mamaika Evaasi
Bandhyaastanandhayasyava 236 | Baalakam Vardhayishyaava Preritaastena Maargena :
Bandhavo Bandhanaanyate
160
Baalakreedaavisheshaistaam 417 Preshanam Yuvayoreta
550 Bandhahetuphalaśaanam
576 Baalakoyamiti Shaana- 226 Preshitaḥ Shrimata Tena 166 Bandhuḥ Kaḥ Ko Na Tha Bandhuḥ 187 Baalachandraadisusvapna
202 Preshayaamaasa Kamsaarit | Bandhubhiḥ Sa Parityaakto
Baalabaddha Laya Bela Preshayaamaasa Tam Drishṭyaa Bandhudhiyaam Tvam Evaika 172
Baalaakamsannibhaṁ Baalam 20 Preshitaaḥ Khacharaadhishaaḥ Bandhan Visaya Praayopa- 342
Baalilokaantaraapatti 314 Preshitaavanu Teneṭvaa
514
Bandhuunsarvaan Samaahuy 526 Balisugreevanamaanaaproktaaḥ Panchadaseitasya 158 Bandho Mokshascha Raaddhaante
Baali Kaalaanukaari Tam 310 Protaaḥ Kamsamallaasch
Babhanja Satyabhamaaya
416 Baahu Bahutaram Tasy Prodarpadantidamano'jani 134 | Babhara Bhaasvaraam Lakshmi 63 Baahya Puravaroodyane
466 Pronmuulya Vaanaraaniika- 324
Babhuva Ksheenapunyasya 327 | Baamasthairyavachaḥ Shrutvaaprollanghaya Gopadamivambunidhi 328 | Babhuvaturahiindrascha
। Baahyaabhyantarashuddhaḥ 137 Plavanaiḥ Samavasthaana. Babhuva Staviraarupa
288 Baahya Taradvishadhbhedababuvaasyah Patiḥ Pankteḥ
Bilaanniragtya Naagashcha Babhuvuh Praaninaḥ Kampaphanivaydyaastadaakarnhya
274 508
Beejajasau Padarthaanaam
473 Balam Kalakalam Kinchifalam Chedasti Charyaaya
Buddhyaadickerddhayastasy 132 Phalam Jainamuneṛvaakya
270 Balam Parashuraamaḥ Swaṁ
Buddhvaa Tataḥ Sa Niryaata Phalam Trilokasamraajya
Balakeshavamukhyava
386
Buddhim Shaktimupaayam Cha 282 Phalam Swaanimishatvasya Balatejomhaavikriyaamiḥ
Buddhipuurvaa Kriyaalingaphalaantyakaaryacharyaanaam 226
Baladevascha Sampraapy 387 Buddvaa Saparyayam Sarva 138 Phala prasavaheenaṁ vaa
283 Balasyashṭasahastraani
Bubhukshaapidito'pyesha
540 Phalaanyanu kramaacheṣaam 214 Balaakhyamukhyapanchaanta
Bubhukshurmataram Bhoktum 540 Phalenaadhogatiḥ Sarvaaḥ
Balaatkaarena Taam Tasmaad
285
Bubhukshustatra Vipro'sau 475 Phalenaapi Samaasena Balaavashṭambhakinnaavani
| Bodhastavaakhilavilokan- 568 Phalgune Krishnasaptamaya- 60 | Balina Saha Yuddhasya 524 | Bodhaadayo Guyaaḥ Sve'ami
297
205
437
415
316
350 118
226
63
132
236
448
271

Page #647:
---------------------------
Bodhitaḥ samatītātmābhodhitā iva devendrāḥ bodho śraddhā viśeṣasya -
Brahmakalpādhipo brahma
Brahmakalpādhihāgatya brahmakalpe 'bhavad devo brahmalokāttādābhyetya
Brahmavatkarado naitau
Brahmasthānottara bhāge
Brahmandro 'yam divo 'bhetya
Brāhmaṇyanindita e cāstāṁ
Brūhi kiṁ karma puṇyaṁ me
Brahmanyamiti tad dvandva
[bha]
Bhagavan vāsudevasya
Bhagavān vardhamāno 'pi
Bhāgiratho 'pi tāṁ gatvā
Bhaktyā damavarākhyāya 187 bhaktyā pradakṣiṇīkṛtya 458, 502 bhagali rvāgali dvaipāyanaḥ bhagavan kiñcidicchāmi bhagavatyatra ko doṣo
561
160
204
340
Bhagavantāv ahaṁ pūjyau bhagavan mad gṛhaṁ dvau dvau
388
416
466
12
263
381
300
511
438
126
416
Bhaṅgena mārgātpracyutya
Bhaṭaiḥ parasparāṁstraṇi bhaṭṭārike khagendrasya
Bhaṭṭārike vadaitat
Bhadraṁ tamasthādāvṛtya bhagavāt bahudānatvāt bhadra dvādaśavarṣānte bhadramitravaṇik
Bhadramitro 'pi pāpena
Bhadramitro 'pi pūtkāraṁ bhadrāntaguṇavīrābhyāṁ bhaḍilākhyapura e deśe
Bhaḍreṣā kāmarūpasya bhayankārākhyapalliśa bhayādiva tam aho 'ribhayenalajjārāmabharataḥ prathamaḥ deśa

270
223
386
236
224
531
118
Bhartā gandharvadattāyāḥ
118 | Bhartuḥ suvarṇasya bhartsayanti sma cāpalyāt bharmatirbhavas
3
64
202
531
163
Ślokānāmākāradya nu kramaḥ
Bharataḥ sāgarākhyo 'nubharatārddhamahīnātho
Bharate ko 'tra pāścātyaḥ bharato dīrghadantasna
364
346
485
213
263
188
Bhavataḥ śatrurutpannaḥ
Bhavata paripṛṣṭā 'yaṁ
Bhaktāpi mahāprītyā
Bhavatibhirvarākībhi
Bhavato 'pi namaḥ kṛcchra
Bhavato viprakanȳāṁ
Bhavatyacetanam kintu bhavatyāḥ sa namir nāmna bhavadevo 'pyupāgatya
Bhavadbhaṣā bṛhannāvā
Bhavadbhyāmeva tad śāstra bhavadbhiḥ kaiścidapyābhyāṁ bhavantam bhagavandrṣṭvā
Bhavannr̥tyakalāṁ kalyāṁ bhavannirūpitaṁ kārya
Bhavasthitivaśādubaddhabhavātapaparimlānabhavanprāmāṇamityākhya-bhavan raktaṁ tayościttaṁ
Bhavitā katham asmākaṁ
Bhavisyati kṛtapra ṣaṇasya
Bhavisyati mahādevī
Bhavisyatīti yat proktaṁ
Bhavisyadbaladevo 'pi
Bhavisyāmy aham apyudyāt bhaveccibuka manyeṣāṁ
120
106
108 | Bhave bhāvyatra nava me
361
564
383
531
566
Bhavyānugrahamukhyāmabhavy e bhagali deśeśa
356
2
506
461
227
527
484
315
144
472
432
400
536
157
551
407
536
170
286
473
100
500
483
503
267
563
205
164
334
Bhave bhrāmatyavishrāmyan
466
Bhavya bhakṣitapūrvaṁ te bhavya bhūpasahasreṇa
456
Bhavȳātmānāṁ paramanivṛtisādha- 566 bhavȳānāṁ kalpavṛkṣāḥ syu
564 326
11

Bhavyo 'yaṁ vratamādāya bhavyo 'yamiti taṁ matvā
Bhavyo vyastaiḥ samastaiśca
Bhāgayācanayātrādibhāge jayantadevasya
Bhāge manohara yāme
214
Bhāge viśākhanakṣatre 438 436
Bhājanaṁ bhojanaṁ śayyā
53
111
61
264
461
YEE
543
162
Bhāṇḍāgārāvalokārtha
Bhāti piṇḍīmā bhartu -
Bhānāvudayamāyāti
ક
366 | Bhikṣārtha devakī gehuṁ
242 Bhinnaścecchūnyatāprāpti
Bhānuman bandhupadmānāṁ bhāryā jayāvatī śrīmatī
Bhāryā tayorabhūn nāga
Bhāryā tau śaṅkhaśailasthā
Bhāvayitvā bhavadhvaṁsi
Bhāvayitvā yayau dīkṣāṁ bhāvasaṁyamavidhvasti
Bhāvānāmanumānena
Bhāvicakradharaṁ viddhi
Bhāvi cakriprabhāvena bhāvitādāyik

Page #648:
---------------------------
620
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapurana:
317
343
57
303
513
268
1
456
7
76
Like a hungry person, I eat without discrimination, lamenting, "I am eating!" Disturbing the three worlds, the Bhukhechara Kumara became a Bhavanavasi-Indra and wandered in the forest, intoxicated. Becoming the Asura, he approached Vrishabhasena. There was once a king named Padmagulmakhya, who performed severe penance. The king, unable to bear the penance, became known as Bhupala. In that battle, the king's valor was meaningful. Born in Simhapura on the earth, he again prevented the fear of Samsara for many. He again prevented the loud noise of the destruction. He obtained a multitude of ornaments. For the sake of ornamentation, the Sala tree became his. It is said that the king had many servants who were like gold. Out of affection, the servant named Dridhapriharyakhya was dear to the king. Summoning him, the king should use the rod of punishment. The crest of the mountain is the abode of the Serpent. He should be given Virapura to enjoy. The Brahmana should be given to enjoy. Quickly removing the thirst for enjoyment, through the union of enjoyment and yoga. Considering the enjoyments, the monkeys, some - 354. The experience of enjoyment is for one - 213. My daughter, do not be attached - 452. Through the doors of enjoyment and enjoyment - 261. In the temple town of the fish - 363. The great queen of the fish lord - 360. On another day, at the time of eating - 151. Outside Mathura - 416, 404. After feeding, then giving that - 113. "Oh, from where have you obtained?" - 378. In the proximity of the Bhaumopādhyāya - 182, 463. Wandering, Viśākhānandī - 85. With the substances that excite Madana - 201, 184. The bees, leaving the lotus - 266, 250. Wandering in the forest of fear - 288. His brother named Sumitra - 167. From my good fortune - 300. Gradually contemplating with delusion - 230, 231. Then going out - 565, 307. Wandering, at the end, on the bank of the Sindhu - 348. And with the honey-drinking bees - 165. Wandering in the wilderness of Samsara - 150, 524. The sweet Vakula and others - 535, 466. With the help of the sweet and others - 151. The sweetness also arose between them - 206. With sweetness, the nature of the deer - 104. By some king of Madhura - 104. At midday, the destruction of the kings - 558. In the middle of that mountain - 136. In the middle of that, the well-behaved - 345. In the middle, that - 376. In the middle, the lofty-minded - 372. In the middle of the forest, circumambulating - 355. In the middle, placing the two - 322. The knowledge of the mind's penetration - 16, 252. Maniketuḥ, again his - 463. Manimatiḥ, the aerial, adorned with qualities - 330. The knowledge of the mind's penetration, the scriptures, penance, and tranquility - 304. I do not have much intelligence - 443. For whom the essence of human birth exists in my hand - 521. Having attained human birth - 515. Humans are suspicious, animals - 562. The lifespan of humans is superior - 562. For the sake of the birth of my dear son - 366. The misconduct of humans - 46. May you forgive the son - 458. Withdrawing the bow and arrow - 263. Purification of mind, speech, and body - 291, 222, 560.

Page #649:
---------------------------
Manovega, another birth, today, in the beautiful garden, went to the beautiful forest, in the beautiful forest, dharma, in the beautiful forest garden, by beautiful Rama, etc., the lord of the Mandara, etc., groups, the gentle child, the father, entering the mantra hall, by the ministers, everything was done, the group of mantras was called together, the minister, for a long time, in the ocean of birth, the one who was blessed with the enthusiasm of the mantra, by the use of mantra medicine, the minister, etc., on the banks, the gentle fragrance, the gentle light, the gentle, gentle light, the sun, like the gentle raga, on the high, the gentle Mandara, the spread, the gentle, inauspicious, the experience, this, in the temple, called Agni Mitra, in the temple, the world famous, the gentle, the family, the form, the gentle, the goddess, the gentle, the one who will protect, I think, natural, of that, of mine, the one who has eyes, for the pleasure, my arrival, this also, mine, also, the position of the prince, I did not make, like this, in this, the guru, no other, mine, thinking, another, mine, the rest, also, I, this, thinking, it is clear, I, all the jewels, mine, the benefactor, this, by me, a great sin was done, by me, that, said, this, by me, the kingdom of the three worlds, by me, this was brought, the goddess, the benefit of the meaning, deciding, 112, 465, 5.3, 285, 241, 463, 82, 115, the one who is called Mayuragriva, 176, 54, the order of the letters of the verses, without me, its beauty would be, 448, 448, by me, this girl, to him, by me, thus, if, it is to be abandoned, by me, thus, 'Sulasadeto, the ray, these, the evil path, the human form, having taken, or, the one who is bound by the rules, that, from, the one who has dirt, the one who has fallen, the lord of the mountain, the one who rules the mountain, the one who is called the lord of the mountain, 142, 243, 282, 541, 5.30, 266, 266, the wrestler, for his own marriage, the wrestler, etc., there were, in the lineage of the wrestler, the Jina, 240, 100, 518, by the great time, seen, being, 301, the great time, also, the desired, 41, the great time, was, there, in the great qualities, that, the truth, the great reservoir of water, always, 25ε, the great sorrow, the wave, the mixed, 322, the great goddess, also, those, seeing, by the great door, going, the mountain, the wind, the breath, on the mountain, in the story of Kunjika, the dirty, the crooked, the delighted, 308, 52, 287, 268, 267, 348, the great city, the lord, the horse, etc., 271, 316, 156, 203, 307, 224, 254, the great strength, was, the son, 265, the great fear, or, having arrived, the great, the rising, his, the great, mine, only, he is worthy, 27, the great Purana, the treasure, 276, the great Purana, of the Purana, the man, 144, in the great city, the wind, the chariot, the king, the great worship, always, doing, 206, the great departure, the actions, 27, the prosperity, the one who brings, 85, the great jewel, like, in the ocean, 508, the great wrestler, many, having conquered, the great delusion, the planet, the one who is caught, 466, 27, the great fear, in, 303, the great, the fortunate, from, the one who asks, 151, the great pride, the sun, 350, the great, the prosperity, the one who is endowed, 127, the great, the prosperity, by, going, 124, 71, the great, the prosperity, having attained, the great vow, the great assembly, 430, the great stone, all, the limbs, 463, the great stone, by those, all, 235, 247, 238, 268, 276, 262, 103, 166, 157, 518, 538, 482, 241, 443, 577, 275, 66, 164, 422, 168, the great height, the one who is rising, the great yoga, from, the one who is promised, the great jewel, the city, the world, 286, the great wind, also, there, the great lineage, the earth, his, 533, the great, the bright, the chariot, was, 256, the great, the bright, then, the god, the three, the great, the bright, then, the god, 421, the lord of the earth, the lord of the horse city, the great Indra, the magic, the one who brought, 447, the great Indra, the victory, his, the best, 182, the great Indra, the victory, to him, this, the great effort, it is to be made, 403, the great fruit, the one who gives, the high, 282, the great, the insult, the one who is worthy of worship, 488, the beautiful garden, the great strength, the lord of the earth, 347, the great strength, the one who is called, the city, in, the Nandana, the king, 127, me, having entered, having approached, 7, me, he will feed, thus, he said, the one who is attached to the food of meat, etc., 316, 233,

Page #650:
---------------------------
236 332
241
222
153
622
In the Uttarapurana of the Mahapuraana, on the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, in the year 247 of the Maas cycle, on the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, 68 years and 16 days after the 2nd, 26th, the foolish creature, on the fourth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, 16 years and 16 days after the 168th, the foolish soul, himself, on the bright fortnight of Magha, in the month of Magha, the great soul, the family resemblance, 286
There are eight of them, by their original differences,
224 Matangas, with their tall bodies, 318 Maheindras, having become celestial beings,
From the root, beginning with the earth, 462 Mothers, only these are not, 36. Mitravira, the lord of the forest,
485
Digging up the roots, collecting them, 347 Matagni, and she herself, 406 Mitra, Rudradutta's, 348 At the root, of the special duality, 347 Mother, they are very tame, 113 Mithila, he conquered,
The deer, some of them, do not harm, 550 Mother, Aparajita, of Keshava, Mithila, the king of the earth,
Deer, from there, then, terrible, 385. Mother, Srinagadatta's, 463 Falsehood, the absence of restraint, 148 Mrigavati, a son was born,
451 Mother, of these, Yamunadatta, 388 Falsehood, of the astrologers, in the world,
The deer, went, with the speed of the wind, Mother, connect with restraint, so it is said, 517 Falsehood, arising from birth, 158 Being sought, indeed, my creeper, 510 In the month of Magha, on the bright fortnight,
Falsehood, slander, and accusation, 274 Some died, some again, 320 In Madhava, on the last day of the bright fortnight, 128 Falsely, they took refuge,
480. Death, the practice of performing,
270 Loss of honor, among co-wives,
26.
Wearing the garland of liberation, 402/ Death, or by the wheel of Dharma, 171 With the loss of honor, broken, releasing, making reconciliation,
Dying, born in the eighth kalpa, 402 Mind, and it is of four kinds, 156 The path of liberation, leading the worthy, 237 Dying, there itself, in due course, 151 The pillar of the mind, the rays, these,
The path of liberation, taking refuge, of humans, and of the gods,
Dying, there, the mountain of birds, the lotus of the mouth, of all, 461
118
461 Human, the end of the upper part, 188 With the mouth, the lotus, with the eyes,
Dying, in the Maheindra kalpa, he became, 42 Do not be afraid, so, friendship,
The main, all, prosperity,
477
Dying, in Pulindi, he became, 402 Do not be afraid, you are a hero, this, O beautiful one, the breath of the serpent king,
Dying, having attained that duality,
261 360
512 May I be released, from this world, as long as, illusion, do not go in vain,
Dying, he, the king of the gods, 264
261 I am another, here, I am also another, The seal, and the happy one, those two,
Dying, having become, in the Himalayas,
405 By illusion, the sin of the Asuras,
270.
The muni, Dharmaruchi, by name, 529 The mridanga, etc., the elephant king, etc., 150 Maricha, in his mind, affectionate,
The muni, Sagaraseena, by name, 276
543
The mridanga, having fallen, on the ground, 535 The path of the virtuous, the living beings, The muni, having renounced, in due course, 177
Soft, cool, strong, 361 The muni, Gupta, by name, seeing, the eleventh day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha,
488 235 The muni, the stars, the group, scattered,
Soft, the skin, smooth, 204 In Margashirsha, on the bright fortnight, 68, 216 The muni, spoke, O king, 116
Soft, the arms, the pair, holding, 203 In Magha, standing, always, of the Yadavas, 375 By the munis, many, it was said,
Sweet-eating, nourishing, 540 In Magha, in this, the burning,
The muni, by the use of the mat,
215
Meghanada, the sun, became, 211 The garland, or the essence-less one, that, 458 The muni, and his words, he understood,
Thus, and thus, in time,
411 The garland, the lineage, by name, 324 The muni, Suvrata, the Tirthesh,
Meghbhira, and his son,
278 The garland, he gave, with joy, 362
The muni, Suvrata, the Tirthesh, lineage,
332 The ram, the lightning, the special one, or,
E The garland-ending, the golden, the Siddha, 402 The muni, that day, by his brilliance, 553
Mepama, the son of the king,
42. The month, only, abandoning, of the munis, the difficult practices, and,
Friendship, with agreement, should be, 282 The months, fifteen, the extent of the muni, the Indra, etc., of us, 417
Meru, the great mountain, by name, 120 The months, sixteen, the months, from, the muni, with humility,
The ram, the female, etc., the female, by, 22 The months, made, the battle,
157 The muni, Sagaraseena, by name,

Page #651:
---------------------------
##  Sloka Index

623
576
518
36
256 272 270 358 257 310 48 375 280 288 551 175
495
465
4544
463
Moksha seeking, situated, fallen 293, as many-virtuous beings
208
Whose three Jivas, freeing, understanding these 173, as per the rules, waiting
415
Whose lofty mind, delusion, by the rules, of that, as the story, in these
Whose birth, grace, delusion sleep, laughing
Yaga, succeeds, of the capable, as with weapons, etc., delusion wrestler, non-wrestler, who
272 233
Yaga, death fruit, directly, delusion enemy, that shadow
As per the place, instruction 202, Yaga, death fruit, by this, delusion rise, both pierced
As desired, to roam, this
354 Yaga, pretext, starting, silence, situated, seeing 122
As said, contemplating these 433, Yaga, fame, ritual, worship, head garland, medicine garland, and
415 As said, earth-possessing, being 555
Go, my feet service, that, as said, method, lion
Gone, by some, Goddess
453 [Y] As appropriate, praising
60
Yadavas, then, brought, that, debt
223
Yadashas, with Vira, etc., who, karma, transgression, by 160
If, anyone, fourth, is
150
Yadrichchika, not, otherwise, who, underworld mouth, like, well, if, angry, this, heat
Going, to see, assembled, who, son, face, lotus, if, Kshatriya, sons
That, before, descended, cutter, who, burning, doubt, of 158, if, non-envious, you
That, goes, messenger, speaking, who, heaven, essence, happiness, above
If, worshipful, dear, see
281
As long as, rising, feeling, Yakshil, etc., younger brother, of that
If, disease, old age, sorrow
136 As long as, earth, water, ocean, seeing, will be, king, if, desire, saying, anger
That, lotus, creeper, that, Yaksha, king, Mati, Katy 387, if, electricity, practice, of
That, own, this, that, knowledge, fame, how, roaming, noble
258 If, all, poet, king, said
Suitable, this, unsuitable, and
578 Fame, obstacle, seeing
Simultaneously, three, karma, by chance, also, not, agreement
23 Fame, word, meaning, two 257
Battle, wealth, king, who, by chance, forest, gone 111, fame, for, bondage, created 26, if, people, of, said
Battle, field, presiding, fame, meaning, not, that, is 272, if, whatever, seen, that, that, own
Battle, army, weapon, cover, fame, by, pleased, Gods 270, if, whatever, leftover, fault, and
475
Battle, end, not, then, army, fame, animal, killing, dharma 272, if, indeed, that, union, 40
Battle, for, faltering, drum, from, beyond, that, arising
Battle, in, man, effort, by, Yama, that, also, gone, life 365
343 Effort, of, sea, Gupta, of
Battle, in, defeat, making, king, fame, white, moon, shining 433
166 Yogis, countless, before
436
Fame, illuminating, hopes, E, battle, in, Sri, victory, also, this, from, desired, meaning, attainment 26, fame, by, little, by, very
Battle, effort, then, hearing, whatever, certain, sin, Yashodhara, guru, instructed
Battle, fighting, long, foot soldiers, whatever, order, humble, king, 573
Yashodhara, those, jewel, weapon 115, battle, fighting, long, horse, neck, fame, moment, loss, making, self, that 567
From, these, two, Kumaras, 286, young, each other, whatever, all, Pandavas, hearing 422, whose, life, etc., being
Young, many, way, by, whose, name, also, earth, beings
Battle, fighting, battlefield, attained, as per, order, king, not, doing 234
Whose, wealth, attacking, 467, Yudhisthira, all, of, as, that, I, doer 256
Whose, ray, nail, ray, net, sharp 574, fighting, desire, by, those, seeing, not, other, not, people, all
Whose, hand, held, to win
548
Fighting, desire, opposite, side, protecting, otherwise, suitable, that 272, whose, hope, jasmine, garland
Young, in, by, who, saying, as, entrusted, this
Whose, endless, foot, nail 573, young, two, by, spoken, indeed, this 26
138
275
366
186
316
156 242 315 516
162
186 231
476
422
226

Page #652:
---------------------------
624
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraanam
162
502
Your (yuष्मदीयं) earth (भुवि) is protected (ल्यात) by 166 protective garlands (रक्षमाला) shining (भास्वद्) in your house (युष्मद्गृहे) a great jewel (महारत्नं)
62  obtained (सम्प्राप्य) by the one (येन) who has the power (ताग्विर्ष) of the scriptures (ग्रन्थ) 260  the name of the collection of protectors (रक्षसंचयनामात्र) by which (येनाप्तानिमिषेश्वरैरयमयी) the eyes (निमिष) of the lords (ईश्वरैः) are obtained (अप्तानि) 24  jewel garland (रत्नहारं) and the tiriita (तिरीटं) by which (येन) the best (शिष्टमुरुवम) is liberated (विमुक्ते) 237  jewel (रत्ना)  giver (धुपायनोपेतं) by which (येन) the lion (सिंहो) was killed (हतः) in the Sindhu country (सिन्धुदेशे) 146  jewels (रत्नानि) and by assimilating (चात्मसात्कृत्य) the self (आत्म)  whose (येषां)  measure (प्रमेय) is the face (मुख)  the beautiful (सुमुख) measure (प्रमाणं) 566  jewels (रत्नानि) and treasures (निधयश्चास्य)  increased (संवृद्धा) by the support (योगालम्बन) of yoga (योग)
122
jewels (रत्नान्युपायनीकृत्य)  by making (नीकृत्य)  yoga (योग)  great (महांस्तस्य) from them (ताभ्यो) 233
these (एतानि) seven (सप्त) jewels (रत्नानि) this (अयम) yoga (योग)  is spoken (प्रोक्तो) by the sages (ऋषिभिः) 256  jewel weapon (रत्नायुधो)  born (अजायत) from the last (अन्त्य) kalpa (कल्प)  which (यो)  is here (तितिभूदत्र)
jewel (रत्नावतंसिका) garland (माला)  which (यो)  is known (ज्ञेय) to the one (शानशायक) who protects (शान) 158  jewels (रत्नैः)  filled (अपूरयन्)  the gods (देवाः)  me (मां)  who (यो)  was fighting (योधुप्रक्रममाणं)
chariot (रथ) anklet (नूपुर) lord (नाथेन)  with (सम्)  the two (अभ्यां)  terrible (भीम) fighters (योद्धमाभ्यां) 242  chariot (रथ) anklet (नूपुर)  directed (उद्दिश्य)  who (यो)  is the fear (भयं)  doer (कर्ता)  of me (मम)  here (अत्र) 546  chariot (रथ) anklet (नूपुर) king (राजासौ)  who (यो)  is the jewel (रत्न)  collection (सञ्चय)  city (पुर)  lord (ेश)  great (महा)  strength (बलाख्यो) 24  chariot (रथ)  destroyer (अन्तक)  gold (नकस्य)  his (स्वं)  women (योषितां)  ornament (भूषणं)  shame (लजा)
chariot (रथ)  destroyer (अन्तक)  gold (नकस्यायं)  in (सु)  women (योषित्सु)  vow (व्रत)  character (शीलादि) 413
firm (स्थैर्)  direction (दिक्)  wheel (चक्र)  attacking (माक्रभ्य)  the warriors (योधाः)  strong (पुष्टा)  great (महा)  measure (मात्रा) 525  beautiful (रमणीयाभिधं)  making (कृत्वा)  youth (यौवनं)  old age (जरसा)  will pass (पास्यं)
Rambha (रम्भ)  pillar (स्तम्भ)  etc. (अन्येषायौवनापूर्णसर्वान)  other (अन्येषा)  youth (यौवन)  full (पूर्ण)  all (सर्वान)
beautiful (रम्य)  Rama (रामा)  face (मुख)  lotus (अम्भोज) [2]
beautiful (रम्या)  and (च)  beautiful (रम्य)  named (काख्या)  blood (रक्तस्य)  mind (मनसा)  satisfaction (तृप्तिः)
ray (रश्मि)  speed (वेग)  good (सु)  speed (वेग)  etc. (आदि)  composed (रचिता)  his (अस्य)  lotus (अरविन्दाख्यो)  named (ख्यो) 426
ray (रश्मि)  speed (धेग)  etc. (आदिभिः)  with (सार्द्ध)  protecting (रक्षित्वा)  stood (अस्थात्)  that (तं)  prince (कुमारं) 228
taste (रस)  feeling (भाव)  entered (समाविष्टं)  protecting (रक्षित्वैतत्सरो)  this (एतत्)  lake (सरो)  of others (अन्येषां) 517
taste (रस)  bottom (ातलं)  gone (गतो)  also (अद्य)  Raghu (रघुः)  ancient (पुरातनो)  king (भूपः) 344
alchemy (रसायनादि)  etc. (पाकाख्य)  cooking (पाकाख्य)  dust (रजस्येवं)  thus (एवं)  sky (नभो)  part (भाग)
secret (रहस्य)  work (कार्य)  outside (बाह्यत्वं)  colored (रञ्जित)  crystal

Page #653:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index by First Letter

**P**
52
23 40
Www Www
311

**R**
Rajyalakshmi chiram bhuktvā 455 rogoragaṇām tu jñeyam 26 | labdhabodhisamutpanna rajyalakshmyā vyabhāllanī 178 rodho guptādibhisa teṣām 244 labdhalaukāntika stotraḥ rajya sampraptikālaḥ te 236 rohiṇyā puṇyabhapdama
labdhvā prītiṅkarāhvāna rajyasya katamo'treti rohiṇyato manovegā 165
lamethām iti tadvākyarajyasya dubharaṁ bhāraṁ
raudragakṣasagandharva
460
lalajjihvāśatātyugra rajyasya) 'meveti 471 | gairave'jani duṣṭātma 270
lābho lābheṣu putrāṇām 6 rajye pañcasahasrāṇi
likhitau vā sajīvānām 457 262 rāmaṁ vā turagārūḍha
liladayiṣavo'nyo'nyam [l]
22
līlāvalokanaihāsarāmadattā tatacchyutvā 114
360 lakṣaṁ trayam vinirdiṣṭā 221 rāmabhaṭṭārakenaham 305
lubdho na labhate puṇyam lakṣaṇe reṣa bhikṣāśī
261 rāmasyāpi gadā ratnamālā 85
leśyā yasya mṛṇālanāladhavalā 65 lakṣatrayāyuḥpukti 135
lokahitam matvā
327 rāmābhipretakāryasya 305 lakṣatritayasamiṇḍi- 23
lokadvahihitonānya- 253 rāme cetprema tadviddhi
301
lakṣapañcaprāmāprokta rāmo nāma balo bhāvi
506
lokanānantaram nasā ૨૯૪ lakṣapañca supūrvāṇām
lokanālyantaravyāpi
128 rāvaṇasteṣu naḥ śatru- 306
lakṣāsamāyuścatvāriṁś
204
lokapālāntrilokānām 204 rāvaṇānujasugrīva
3.3 lakṣmaṇam nāyakam kṛtvā
310
lokamāno nabho rāma- ૨૯૨ rāṣṭra'sminneva vikhyāte
lakṣmaṇapramukhān mukhān 313 lokamāno vibhaṅgena 438 rāsabhīrūpamāpādya
367 lakṣmarā.śca jagatpāda
lokena ca vibhuṭākulī- 474 rāhagaratārkasampātād 327 |
lakṣmaṇākramavikranti- 288 lokā'yam devaloko vā 81 ripunṛpayam adandaḥ puṇḍarīki- 31 lakṣmaṇāpi muni natvā 401
locanābhyām harervāṣpa
456 sakmiṇī satyabhamā ca 383,416 lakṣmīḥ parikara ratasya
lobhadharmāsurāhādi- 304 sakmiṇyātha mahādevyā 366
lakṣnīḥ sahacārī tasya
68 lobākrantāśayo deśāt ૨૭૭ rucakākhye vimāne'yam
lakṣmīranasvarī teṣām
25
lobātsahasrabāhuśca ruciḥ pravartate yasya 557 lakṣmārivādi cakreśam
lohanāmā catuṛthaḥ syā- 564 rudradatta tvayā prajñā
466
lakṣmīlāṭapatṭe'smi- 205 laukāntikaḥ samabhyetya 123 rudradatto'gamatśvānō 466
lakṣmīrvikāśamasyāyāt 34
lakṣmīlāṁchanamegāsy - ruṣito rāvaṇo dūte
[v] rūpaṁ pañcavidhaṁ śveta
lakṣmyau kapolayorladamyā 27 523
vaktum dhārayatā yaśo 268 rūpamālokya tatko'ya
lakṣmī nave yuvānī 153
167 vaktītyetan nimittāni 413
lakṣyābhyānnivṛttaḥ san 510 vaktṛśrotrīkathābhedān 138 rūpayauvanasaundarya
lagnagocarasamśuddha
324 vakttralīlāṁ dadharāṣṭra- 136 rūpalāvaṇyakāntyādiḥ
lakādāhena dāhaṁ ca 313 vakṣodghnam asau vāri 288 rūpaśobhāṁ vinā nemaḥ
laṅkādvīpādiṣu svairaṁ 347 rūpādiguṇasampatti
vaṅgākhyadeśe mithilānagare laṅkānagaramāsādya
vacasyāsite tasya 257 rūpādyā strīguṇās tasyaḥ laṅkāpurabahirbhāge
vacio'voca dviçāryoccairūpādyāḥ strīguṇās tasyaḥ laṅkāpure'pyanu mato
vajrapātāyitattasbhā- 370 rūpānvayavayaḥśikṣā
latāṁ samutsukastanvīṁ 287 vajramuṣṭistagālokya 36. rūpiṇī subhagānṛtyagītalabdhakālādirapto'pi
vajrayudhakumārasya 180 rūpīva śauyam akhilaṁ labdhanikṣrāntakalyā

Page #654:
---------------------------
225
8
626
Mahapuraana Uttarapuraanam Ghatavimba Pravaalaadi 205 Vappilaa Tanmahaadevii 333. Vasundhara Kumaaraaya
127 Vanikasangha Samaakrosh- 251 | Vayam Yuvaabhyaam Sanyojyaa 166. Vasundhara Maheepatihi
338 Vanigaadeshanirdiyo 521 Varadattaadayo'bhuvan
387
Vasundharaamcha Tatraiva Vatsaraanaam Sahasraani 2 = Varadharmayati Prapya
Vasundhareenimittena Vatsalastu Bhyamaaniyaa
404
Varadharmayateervajramustihi 361 Vasumatyaam Abhut Sanuh 402 Vatseti Palayatyenaam 486 Varaahaaduurasaavun
Vasusheno'pyashaktatva- 124 Vatse Ghenoriv Sneho 168 Varunaa Cha Mrtaa Tasy
430
Basostasmin Mahaarandhra 274 Vad Kena Vane Bhraamyan 265 Varunaa Jyaayaso Bhaarya
426 Vastuvrittivachobheda
60 Vadatiindrayamasthaanam
Varna Trayasamudhbhutai 537 Ghastubodhe Vineyasya
550 Vadateti Vadanti Taam
Varnaakrityaadhibhedaanaam 476 Vastraabharanamaalyaani Vadanaabjaprasaadena
304 Vartate Jinpoojaasyaa
Vasvalayapuraadhaaso Vadanti Nipunaa:kshmaaje 302
Vartate Devpoojaayaam 258 Vasvalayapura Seendra
292 Vadannityanvagaatso'pi
222 Varddhante Yatra Dharmaartha Kamaah 136 Vahanti Jaanaki Duhkham 323 Vadishiyaami Na Bhokshye Cha 263 Varddhante Sma Gunaastasmin
Vahan Duhkhaani Tavrudhim 331 Vadeti Prishtava Gandharva
510 Varddhamanashriyam Drishtava
Vahim Pradakshinikritya 335 Vadetvaai Tatasten Varddhamanena Garbhena
Vaakprayogo Na Tathyah Sya- 477 Vadhiraa Kubjakaa Kaanaa
Varddhamanavratah Praante
458 Vaakyam Shraddhaaya Tadyogya- 476 172 Vadhyaavataranaayaami
Varddhamano Jinaah Shrimaan 443 Vaagdrishtishrutigatyaadi 541
546 Vanam Vishaakhanandaaya
Varyah Suryaprabho Naama 450
344 Vaagvistaraparityaagavanam Sarvartukam Naama
Vaagdhvaamiv Vaagraashivarshadvayasahasrena
266 Vanamalaasya Devyasyaa
Vallabhavalitalola '537
Vaacha Manoharaarthena 207
. Vaachah Parimitaah Swalpav Vallabhedakuvamsasya Vanaraajastadaasesha
48 516 Vasheekurusva Tadvikshya
Vaacha Kayena Manasa Vanaraajasya Tatkantaa
436 514 Vasheekritena Saamraajya
Vajinah Singhamutrena Vanaraajaatparo Naarithe 515
Ghasheekritya Tato Buddhi- 117 Vaanchiten Raseneva 346 Dhanalakshmivivalokya 288 Vasantasamaye'nyedhu
Vaadavaagnirivaambhodhi Baavaasadeshamaakhil
577 Vasante'chikaaravaaja 421
Vaadinah Shatsaataneyeva 436 Vanasmranasantyakta- 246
Vasantyarannye Khaadanti Vanaanyapi Manojaya
3-6
Vadipravaadhupanyasta 181 Ghasu Prasiddha Satyena 273
Vaadhyamaanaah Punah Praani- 455 Vane Khadirasaraakhya
Vasuh Nishkantako Prithvi
263 Vayuvegaajitaasesha
140 Vanecharapatihi Kaschi. Ghasuh Satyasy Maahaatmya- 264
Vayuvegaa Priya Tasy 452 Bane Priyangakhandakhya 117, 351
Vaaraanasii Pravishtaabhyaam Ghasudevakumaaro'pi Vane'avtaarya Surathaapy
Vaaraanasii Puraadadh
284 461 Vasudevamaheeshasya
375 Bane Banecharaschanda
Vaaraanasii Puraadheesho 254 533
Vasudevasuto'pyaaptavane'ham Parvatenaama
380 Vaaganasyam Pure Purva 550 265 Vasudevo'antimaschaiva Vanditum Mandaram Jainam
Vaaraanasthaamabhuudvishva- 434 550
Vasudevo'amuto Gatvaa 355 Vanditvaa Dharmamaakarnnya
Vaaruni Dik Praaye Pashya 262 143 Vasudhaaraam Suraih Praaptaa Vanditvaa Svochitasthaane
Vaaruni Poornachaandraakhyo 116 .67 Vasudhaaraadiko Pooja
216 Yandimaagadhvrindena
Vaaranipoornachaandro'yam 113 380 Vasudhaa Vasudhaa Gehe
280 Vandishyante Bhavaatete .
Vaarto Janakayaagasya 280 562 Vasudhaiva Sthitaa Mettu
Vaartaa Parampagashaatabandikritya Kumaaro'pi 515. Vasunaa Cheda Dvayorvaade
273 | Vaarmukamukaniribhaasi
521.
340
466
285
360

Page #655:
---------------------------
##  Sloka Anukrama (Order of Verses)

627
134
- 48
26 421 517 446
88 416 153 66
66
264 576
Dar
153 183
410 501 456 437 273
471 86,536

Vashparilvishalaakshi 516 | Vishaya taan nivaedyaitavasudevasy roopena- 418 Vishayaadhaatra vishramya vasupujyajineshasya
Vidambanamidam sarva vasupujyeshasantaane
68 Vitarkayan kadambakavaso rindrasya pujyo'yam 87 Vitarkayantmityenam vimshati syuh sahasraani 335 Vitirnnavan sutaam tubhyam vimshatim vatsaraanniitvaa
Vidhadhatyasy dushcheshta vimshatyandhyupamattaayu
Vidarbhnamaamukhyaashtaavikasannilani rejasarojali- 46 | Vidaarya pravishatyaaya vikayasayakaistikhnai 343 Viditasakalashaastro vikritya roopam svam tatra
Vidurena nripairanyaivikritya vividhaan bahooun 378 Videhe dhaatako khandhe vikramenaiva vkraanaam
Videhe mangalaavatyam vikriyabalatejobhih 67 Videhe'smin pratichyaasivikriyaavadhiviryatvit 40 Vidyaam saa bhraamari naamna vikhyaatavindhyanagare 66 Vidyaadharaadyapraagbhaage vigalanmalaati maalaah 466 Vidyaadharih samaahuya vigraham tadgraham matvaa
Vidyaadharena kenaapi vicarya te tridoshoth 116 Vidyaadhayon vayam lankaavichikitsaa naditira- 367 Vidyapoojaan vidhaayaasy vichitrakaravastrena
464 Vidyaabhyaasaadvinnaa baalyaam vichitrarakshavallibhih
Vidyaavinaashamaayaanti vichintyeeti yatīn bhaktyaa vidyaasaadhanavighnaarth
paan bhaktyaa 263 Vicchinnachaaranaah petu
381
Vidyucchoraahayam kritvaa vijayaakhyam puram gatvaa 355 Vidyutrprabha soumanasah vijayaadaagatam devam
| Vidyutrprabhavay khyato vijayaaj samaapurya 222 Vidyutadaadiprabhaavege vijayaayaa ileshasya 175 Vidyutryutivallaskmivijayaadisamaarudh
524 Vidyuudamstram cha saamoaktavijaya giremu ni 267 Vidyaadastra suto jaatah vijayaadhgughaayaam tanni- 152 | Vidyuuishtraadkaanpanchavijaya lakaakhyesho
Vidyuuishtraahayo vidyaadharo vijayao'lakaapuryah
Vidyunmalyaasch tasyaeva vijayaache suri bhootvaa 401 Vidyunmaala tayo suun vijayenaatra labdhena 454 | Vidyunmaalin evaamuvijigishu kilaadyaabhoo- 376 Vidyunmaali bhavetate vijigishaarguneh shadbhih
Vidyunmaaleti bhootvaa tuk vijrimbhamanaharshaambho
463
Vidyunmaalyesh devo'bhoovijam bhitamatijnaan- 437 Vidyutrlataabhidhaa churnavishapayati matswami 306 Vidyutrlater devaadi vijnaapyadaapayan kanya 502 Vidwattvam saccharitratvam
507 Vidwattvasaccharitratve 516 | Vidhaaya jinabimbaani 236 Vidhaaya dashadhaatmaanam
Vidhaaya nihatasthuna 160
Vidhaaya madyamaansaadi
Vidhaaya yauvarajyancha 40
Vidhaaya vasupujyam cha vidhaaya vidyaaya praagvavidhaaya vidhivadbhaktyaa
Vidhaaya vipule maage 380
Vidhaaya vimalaam praap 36
Vidhaaya sangare bhangam 458
Vidhaaya sa mahaanidraa 102
Vidasyate dadamiiti vidhaaya hrdi yogindra
Vidhaayaashtamamahaar 263
Vidhitsugurusushrushaa 114 Vidhitsurnigraham sagram 263 Vidhishyiyasan sakto 54 Vidhidhandhaa na chedagni
Vidhu so'dho vidhaayairv 301 Vidhama dhamaketupa 282
Vidhvasy vishvakarmaani 532
Vinamravishvavidyash 186 Vinayachyuta bhoopala 188 Vinayashri sutaa tasya
Vinayashririti khyataa 16 Vinayashri datass 116 | Vinayounnayaniineeta 118 | Vinashyati na me sheelam 412 Vinashtetyavadattasya
Vinyasy manibhaabhasi 163 Vinyasy rajyayogyor 431 Vina pitroranushaana 453 Vinarthibhirapi tyagi 537
Vinaasho raavanasyeeti vinihkramanakalyana
Vinihataparase nah 505 Vineetacharanasyaendu 164 Vineeto yauvanaraambho 138 | Vineyaattasya jantuunaam
18
235
166 371 404 403 532 506 263 345 548 283 548 218 276
365
60
531 226

Page #656:
---------------------------
Vineyoham kritashradho vipakasutraparyanta. Vipulambamalalakshmivipulanau hatashesha viprastvan shatpramavadi viphalanamishstva smo vibhajya rajyalakshmi svam vibhati gopuropetavibhasi bhayatostejo vibhih shaknoshe kim martuvisheeshanashanitvena vibheeshanadadyah kechit vibheeshanaddibhishchama vibhutimadviteeya vibhushya pitari chasyavibbhushya bhushanai sarva. Vibhyanmrityostamaddhavan vimalavahanamahaddaram vimalayah suta mango vimale'bdasame bandhe vimane'nupame namna vimane shrishrge devo vimane sthapavitvashuvimuktatantrabhih sadham vimukthitirmmasam vimrujya lochane tasmai viyuktasmi panigyaryaviyagametayoh saduvirakah samsateh purvavirakata chityadevavirajenaishirojenadirajya rajyabhogattavirajya rajyabhagheshu viratabhupaterbhurivirantavyamito dharmavirasansarasan matva vilavam balam vishnuvilasini karoddha yavilasaivibhramairavaivilokya kila kalena vilokineenam kantanam. Mahapurane uttarapuranam 468 (vilokya gandhamadyadi- 368 vishvabhutih patiratasya 84 | vilokya charanadvandam 517 vishvabhutistapah prayat 18 | vilokya chitrachulakhya 184 vishvabhutevishakaadi 84 527 vilokya tam mahanaaga vishvasyarakhilitam prashasti- 572 478 vilokya tam mrugam matva 444 shvan deshaan hityante 387 vilokya tabale bhangam 526 vishvanvaipayikanmogan 434|| vilokya pandabhupalo 345 vishvavalokanaktinvadananta- 568 vilokya bhavati-preetya 484 vishvasavyanashe tasya 178 vilokya mudramudbhidya 452 vishayad masankeenam 465 | vilokya ragad bhupen vishayadhipatibhusva. 271 270 vilokya nihitakrodhau vishayalpasukhegevam 534 328 vilokya svayamayeta- 478 vishaye pundarikinyaa- 401 328 | vilokyananganimukt vishaye pushkalavattya 341,44, 264 pilokyanantaram rajnaa vishaye mangalavattya riloktyasmatkyadadur 466 vishaye vatsavasekhye 482 | villopitastada padma vishayeshu tadaivasau vivarjitartadhyanasya 405 vishayeshu vishaktah san vivadoabhunmaharatatra vishayarevacetsaukshyam vivadi yada bhangobatra 267 vishavalliphalantyashu 405 vishastanapayhpaya 367 113 vivahavidinatau cha 524 vishtalokya balasya 418 vivahavidinapada- 462 vishta va kshud biladani 556 466 | vishakhanandah samsare vishakhanandastam drishta 80 31 । vishakhanandi tam drishta 86 vishnorhyogemahabhaaga- 148 276 vishakhanandi vihita- 86 vishnarjjatkumaranan 525 visarjanaya maste 468 281 । vishakhabhutiputrena vishakhabhutiretasya 49 | visarjitavato nanda- 375 66 vishakhabhutidharanipatiryami visarjya bandhuvargana 424 286 vishakhabhupatistasmaa visarjyatamiti proktobha 311 218 vishakhe chaturdashyam vismarurvlokainam 353 215 vishakhadem sa chakrako visrujyatamiti proktobha 312 421 vishuddhapudgalarbdha. 461 vistarenam kimuktenaa 385 408 vishuddhayor prasiddhitvat 240 vismayatparitah pashyan vishuddhiparinamamana- 268 382 vishrambbhasanasparsha 210 548 vishleshtya shodashadinani 627 viharaprasthitastasya 517 164 vishvakarmamalairyukta 425 vihartum vipulodyana 154 vishvanandimahutya 446 vihartumudyatah sarve 286 vishvanandi tadakarnnya- 45 bihayaadikaramayat 540 parakhimadasasara 451 85 416 25 546

Page #657:
---------------------------
Harmante sanhṛtya vihṛtya bhāktkāḥ kāñci
Vispa māsamacāyuḥ
Vidvatya punarāgacchan vidhān deśān
Vihṛtya vipvān prāpa
Pitā
Madhye
Bhikṣate sma vīkṣya maṅgayā parīnātha
Dīkṣā vacaḥsthate sākṣāt
Vīkṣya vijñātavṛttāntaṁ
Vīṇāṁ ghoṣavatiṁ cātu vīṇāvādyaṁ yena
Vīṇāspyaretasyatadandadibhigamāḥ
Mīti kanyā prākto yīnīhārasajyatsnā
Vītacavīkāroru
Vītarāgo ci so'pyāha
Vītalā maryādā
Vītaśramastanaspandaṁ vīravasyāśca nandākhya vīraseno mahāvīro vīrānano'milaḥ sarpa
Buddhiṣeṇa varādiśva vṛkṣamūle sthitāṁ padaya
Vṛttakam tatra vakṣyāmo
Vṛttakam tasya dāmo vṛce ślakṣṇe sukhatpaśeṁ vṛthāṭanaṁ parityaajya vṛthā yācitāvṛddhagrāmaṁ nijaṁ gatvā vṛddhikṛiyātmadharmasya
Vṛddhirasya svapākṣatya vṛṣṭimāpātayisyanti vedō'si na vedyō'si vedadbhirahiṁsakta
Vedān suṣmabuddhilā veśyāṁ vasantasanākhyā veṣṭitā ratnaśālena vetsi cedbrūhi sītā
*

64 | Vaidūryādhipatiścāyaṁ
4:5
247
538
75
70
326
386
386
430
161
356
58
5. 2
Ślokānāmakā rādyaṁukramaḥ
357
71
72
348
354
506
E
442
55.8
jaÆ
Rāyakājānā vaijayante trayastriśat
Vaijayanto nṛpastaśya
Jayantyā bo de
Vairṁ vahati te bhrātā
Parivā
Śālakṛṣṇapākṣatya vaiśākhajyapākṣādi
Deśās māsi kṛṇā
Deśākṣasya vipakṣa
Vaiśya sanādāya
Vaiśyaḥ sarvasamṛddhākhvavyanispa vyatītaprati sadhyān
So'spi
Vyāsadeva saptāhā
Vyadhāyi vedhasā tasya
114
134
56
106
231
107
288
44
216
226
20
sar
540
RE
228
438
205
Vyaramat sā samāsakta vyastānānābhibhīṣmāṇ vyākhyāni tvayā sarvadhyānādāra banāne
307
Vyātaṁ yatprabhāyā sado vijayanta 247 vyādhaḥ śṛgālavannāma vyādhitānī
113 385
Vyāptamadyamaniśśhāyā
206
534
Vyāmōhātsulasa priyassasusalaḥ 277 vyāyanāditaṁ
466
Vyāḍarnanānūsāraṁ
61 206
Vyucchinnāyāṁ tadbhavantayayuḥ 254 vyucchiyuktīmārga
356
Vrajannmane stravelāyāṁ
40
Vraṇaḥ ktragaldhārā
167
Gandhyasansakta
375
Vrataṁ tapodhanābhyāśe
560
Taṁ naitasya sāmanyam
63 jata prāṇavyayān
271
Vratasīlaniviṣṭeṣu
160
Vratasyābhipsiṭaṁ saukhyam vratātpratyayamāyāti
424
PRE pratinam vam tatyō'pi 286 matena bhāyate sampannā
575
575
8: 204
-430 467
350
470
457
457
167
261
Śaṅkha vijayaghoṣā
465 | Śaṅkhatūryādibhistasmin
266
Śaṅkhanirnāmikārūpānyāṁ śaṅkhanirnātiko rāśā śaṅkhamerīgajāti
Śaṅkā ca nalinābhyā ca
171
554
184 554
Vrīḍayā pīḍitaḥ so'pi
ś]
Śaṁsanti niścite kṛle
Śakaṭaṁ bhāṇḍasamपूर्ण
Śakaṭākāramādāya

Śakaṭa kālābhyantara
Śaktī devatānāñca
Śaktitrayasampattȳā
Śaktīnāmamahaśasya
Śaktisiddhiprayopetī
Śaktisiddhyanugāmitvā
Śakrāśayā tadā tatra
Śakrāśayā sanmāniya
Śakrādayo'pi ke
Śakāyāni dūrā
Śaṅkamāneti sā pī
Śaṅkhikā ca paribhramya rājendranīlasaṅkāśī
Śaṅkhā nāma dhanadaryāsau
Śatakratuḥ śatāmakhaḥ śatatraṁ sa pacalāriṁ śatasantre yāte
Śatāni trīṇi pūrvāṇāṁ śatāni pañca mantrayasya
Śatāni nava viśeṣā śatāni ṣaṭsaṁ ca śatāni saptapūrva
Śatru mama samutpanna -
Śatruksayakaraṁ karma śabdanispādane lopa

Page #658:
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:

630
Shavyaptih saritsveva
Sharasanani sandhārya
Shariram na bhishagrayam sharirabhogsankharashariravriddhistaasyāsid dhallyena vrishasenaena shashya simhapotena
Shashamkah sevakah premaka
Shastrenāhantumudyuktā
Shāndilākhyatya mukhyasya
Shārgapanchamukha pāncashālayo lilayā vriddhishālākhyavaidyavesheṇa
Shātankare samutpadya shāntachittah sa nirvedo
Shāntam vapushravanaharichicharitram 70
Shāntirabhyeti nirdishṭam shāntivriddhirjaya shreya
Shāntashatirtha santāna
Shāshvatam padamanvicchhan shāstrabhālatvayoraikashāstrābhyānnādānāni
Shāstrābhyāsanashollo
Shāstrōktavidhina bhaktyā shikshakāh khadvatyakashikshakāh shatshatadhvādashasikshakāstasya sadvandyāh shikshitaikādashāngō'sau shithilībhūtabhih kanyā shibikām nāgadattākhyā shibikām devakurvākhyāshibikā devasaṃrūdhā - shibikām vaijayantīākhyām shirasta tpashyato bhartu - shiromukhadisaṃjāta
Shige virājate tasya
Shilām rushtva nripārūdhā shilām hastatalenāhashilatale nivishyocchashalāsalila hetostau shilpibhih kārayitvārka

332 | Shivankare tadishvasya 317 Shivaguptābhidhānasya 36 | Shivaguptamunērante Shivabhūteh samāpannā 46 |Shivabhūtērabhūdbhāryā Shitalākhyājanadhīsha
166
380
266
Shitalāmbhattaṭākam vā
561
408
448
352
113
Mahāpurāṇe Uttarapurāṇam
247
263
76
Shitaleshvasya tīrthānta
Shītalo yasya saddharma
Shīladattaguror pārshve Shīlamāhātmyasambhūta - Shīlāyudho guṇatrāt.
Shīlāvaddā mahādevī Shuktimuktāvisheṣeṇa 575 Shuklakriṣṇa ttripau
470
214 | Shukladhyānam samāpūrya 325 Shukladhyānāgninirdagdha
200
Shukladhyānānalālīṭa
416
Shukladhyānoddhsaddhyātvāshukladhyānena karmāṇi
Shuklaphalgunajāshtabhyām
****
433
Shukkaleshyā shvasanmāsai - Shukka leshya svatejovashukkalleshyādvaya sārddham4 Shukklashyo dvistāngako 335 | Shukle'gānmārgashīrṣasya Shuchishukka chaturthyantashuchau kriṣṇa dashamy anta
247
76
546
Shuddhā eva charanpakṣe
130 Shuddhadeśajabhedam tat 386
Shuddhashraddhānamakaṣayya Shuddhashraddhānasampannam
Shuna stthāne sthito dīno Shubhayoge sitajyedashubhā shabdābhidhānā cha Shubhāshubhavipākānām Shubhāshubha vibhāgōkta
τe
220
321
150
204
161
181
454 Shushhrūṣādyashtadhīdhūryān 347 Shushkāddāramathānyedyu433 / Shūnyagehe'tiduḥkhena
463
327
241
487
75
71
487
365 Shūnyatrikadashajñeya
444
48
466
465
405
214
126 Shūnyadvayandhrokta
420
530
5.3
26
218
Shūnyatra yadvisaptōkta
Shūnyatrayamuniprokta Shūnyatrayayugāṣṭōkta Shūnyatrayendriyaprokta
40
220
Shūnyatrikartuvikhyāta
547
Shūnyadvayadhṣṭaraka
60 | Shūnyadvayen driyakta
37 Shūnyadvayen driyadvayukta
131 | 68
17
455
135
21
15 Shūnyadvitatyavasthaika
Shūnyadvitatyavasyaikai
ShūnyadvitayaṣaḍūrandhraShūnyadvirandhradbhi
Shūnyatrikendriyaikōkta·
Shūnyatritayapakṣaika
Shūnyatritayadvi
Shūnyatritayasaptōkta
Shūnya dvayachatuḥpakṣaShūnyadvayadhatu Shūnya
Shūnyadvayadvirandhrendrisha Shūnyadvayadhvayugāṣṭaka
40
553
366

Shūnyadvayaddhishūnyābdhi
Shūnyadvayadgnipakaṣōkta
Shūnyam pañchāṣṭōkta
Shūnyapañchapakṣābdhi
Shūnyapañchachatuḥ khaika Shūnyapañchachatuḥ dveyaka
Shūnyapañchadvikaika oktā Shūnyapañcha munīndraka
162 | Shūnyapacheranprokta
52
40
186
208
150
Shūnyapañchartudrōktaṣūnyapañcaikpakṣōkta
Shūnyaṣaṭ kaikpūyuḥ ShūnyaṣaḍyugapakṣōktaShūnyaṣaḍvārdhipūrvāyuḥ
Shūnya saptaka svabdhi
Shūro laghusamuththāna
Shrigāla kashchidāsyastham
Shriṇu chichham samādhāya
Shriṇu deva mahashchitra
60.
66
83
123
60
37
246
17
236
74
30
62
74
31
37
131
37
17
82
66
206
387
17
42
325
325
31
4
335
237
23
17
42
57
40
27
325
dar
534
470
378

Page #659:
---------------------------
##  Verse Index by First Word

115.  ślokanāmākārādyanukramaḥ
577.  1
370.  2
108.  śṛṇu bhaṭṭārakasvāmin 286
476.  śrīcandrāhaṁ na bhodaye'sma 514
2.  śrutvā tattau ca gane 352
282.  śṛṇu bhavya bhavarayāsya 15%
145.  śrītripr̥ṣṭaḥ kumārāṇāṁ 
155.  śrutvā tatpodanaādīśo 
517.  śṛṇu bhadra pravakṣyāmi 
163.  śrīdattayāṁ kuśāstrajñaḥ 
108.  śrutya tatpौरुष ख्यातं śṛṇu dherai visṛjya smn 
446.  śrīdharāyaguroḥ pāś 
556.  śrutvā tatsahitu nāha 
464.  śṛṇu bheṇik jambūbhū 
405.  śrīdharasya sutā bhūtā 
255.  śrutvā tatsātm ajo rāma- 
552.  śṛṇu sāgarasenākhya- 
114.  śrīdhagख्या sutā jāta 
377.  śrutvā tadaeva taṁ labdha 
424.  śṛṇvate janmani prāci 
370.  śrīdhara cāgatā nākāt
376.  śrutvā tadgopatiḥ śokā 
476.  śeṣayoṣṭu caturtha tyā- 
250.  śrīnāgajinamāsādya 
376.  śrutvā tadūcanam krodhe. 
328.  śeṣāḥ kalpe bhavannādau 
461.  śrīnāgadatta mātāpi 
386.  śrutvā tadvacanam cakrī 
328.  śeṣāḥ prakr̥tayaḥ tena
461.  śrīnāgad
446.  śrutvā tadvacanam cice 
241.  śeṣamālāṁ samādāya śrīpañcamyāṁ budhā
241.  śrutvā tadvacanam tau ca
238.  śeṣāvasarpīṇīkālaśrīpureśaḥ praj̄āpāl- 
224.  śrutvā tadvacanam manda- 
262.  śeṣau yathā upad̥ṣṭārtha- 
238.  śrīprabhe prathame kaly 
253,342.  śrutvā tadvacanam rājā 
263.  śailastham bhaṁ samuddha śrībhūtiḥ satyaghoshāko
116.  śrutvā tadvacanam vipraśaiśavo cita sarvārthaśrībhūti sacivo nāgaścamarah 
261.  śrutvā tadvacanam sarva
263.  śokadāvānalama lānā
263.  śrīmatī vajrajamcha vā 
342.  śrutvā tannāgarāj o'pi śokākulaḥ sunirviṇṇaśrīmatyaṁ suprasthitākhyaḥ -
388.  śrutvā tannāhama sya śauraya deśādhipaḥ śūra- 
286.  śrīmadgandha kūtīmadhye
286.  śrutvā tāś cittameta syā
22.  śaurayyasya sambhavo yāva
1.  śrīmān jino'jito jīyād 
434.  śrutvā tān sāvadhiḥ so'pi 
22.  śauy o'rjitatvādutsāha 
468.  śrīmānāmukti pary antam
310.  śrutvā dūto'bhyupetyaiṣa - 
152.  śmaśāne rākṣasaḥ pāpī 
453.  śrīmānitaḥ khagadhīśo 
114.  śrutvā dharma ca samyaktraṁ 
53,386.  śraddhādiguna sampannaḥ 
573.  śrīmūlasangha vārāśī 
502.  śrutvā dharma jagatpūjya
565.  śraddhānābhodharadanam
565.  śrīvardhamānam aniśam
363.  śrutvā dharma jinād asmāśraddhāya bodhimāsādya 
50.  śrīvardhamānāmānam ya
325.  śrutvā dharma tadabhyana śraddhālu rdharmamaprākṣī- 
50.  śrīvarmāpi jinendroktyā 
176.  śrulā dharma vrataiḥ sāī
473.  bhaddhā sadyaḥ samutpanā 
371.  śrīdharmā śrīdharo devo'jita
371.  śrutvā dharme satāṁ tyā yaṁ śravaṇāha lādīvāditra
367.  śrīvarmā'sya susīmākhya
118.  śrutvā dhadhiyādatt 
82.  bhaḍane samyama prāpya 
306.  śrībṛtāsvatikā
306.  bhanyairhitamitalāpaiḥ 
112.  śrīṣeṇaḥ kuru jaḥ suraḥ
475.  śrutā'dhyayanasaṁpanna śrāvakaḥ kapiro mākhya- 
514.  śrīṣeṇaścānyadā gatvā
388.  śrutvā nṛpo vaṇimukhyo 
542.  śrāvakaḥ samupety

Page #660:
---------------------------
6
3
317
64
182
206
In the Mahapurana, the Uttarapurana, after attaining the state of Vibhutimadgatva, 527 | He killed by the sixth fast
220 | The world is full of the delusion of the cycle of birth and death, the great sage Shanga- 376 | There is no duality in the Paadagushya
| The world is said to be of five kinds 464 The great sage Nagadatta also 460 The sixteenth chapter is called - 85 The world is going to destruction
55 Having heard the same words
The sixteenth weapon - 337 He is worthy of being worshipped - 463 Having heard with faith, Dharma. The sixteenth will appear 560 He is in the Kadambamukhi well
415 Having heard, he was named Suvrata, the son of Parshva
He will sometimes go to the sky. 125 Having heard, I went there, he said
He will sometimes get a son 154
The angry, intoxicated elephant heard the karma of Kinkada 366
He will sometimes be in the house of the assembly, the ocean of war, the daughter of the king heard the father 511
He will sometimes attain 102 The ocean of war, he endured there, he heard this with great sorrow 173 Sanjayanta, the son
He will sometimes be seated
106 He heard this burden of words 166
He will sometimes be awakened, knowing all that is auspicious 154 It is heard that it is so, even now
He will sometimes be seated, the signs of knowledge and wisdom 176 The head of the guild, by 165454
He will sometimes protect his own 146 The whole head is burning, the best of the best, not another 76
He will sometimes be in Ayodhya 346 They abandon the thousand-petaled lotus 125 The best pilgrimage, in the middle of five. Abandoning the Isana Kalpa
| He will sometimes be in the next verse - 486 The best, having attained Ganadhara. 125 Abandoning the other, abandoning
He will sometimes be a teacher, the best, the true reality, the effort 475 Abandoning by the method of renunciation
He will sometimes go to heaven 163 The best, by the sixth fast
Increase the poison tree
107 | He will sometimes be a meteor 213 The best, we are called by - 461 Restraint, along with many 56 | He will sometimes be in the forest 401 The best, what does she do? 486 Restraint, having properly taken 185, 337
| He will sometimes see a meteor - 238 I also heard, he said
544 Restraint, having taken it himself
346
He will sometimes be a great rain 368 Praised by himself, by someone - 35
The faith of restraint is born
236 He will sometimes be the king of the earth 47 [p]
The highest peak of restraint - 168 The whole earth adorned with a heap of flags and pieces of cloth
281 Restraint, from restraint, the beginning
457
He is someone who is a sinner, thirty munis, he is righteous
He is like a restrained one, he has gone 164 | Who is my curiosity in that 529 Fifty-two great continents, this restraint is also for the sake of
He is curious, he agrees 464 Six zeros, the previous age
The union is born, it is his own, it is of two kinds 568 Having heard the active Dharma 351 Sixty-four, the beginning of Dharma, the union of the body of the embodied
He is attached to the jewel weapon, in enjoyment 115 Six, eight, four, the time of the universe, having taken
| He is a friend of the three seasons, the fortnight
81 Six thousand, the measure, the said, in two years, having passed
He is a friend of the king of the forest
514 The ocean of time, the self, the age - 248 Thousands of years
He is the ocean, the cycle of birth and death, the rest, the six limbs of strength, united
215 Supporting, the goddesses - 216 He is long, with severe penance 132 Six hundred and twenty, the height of the body
231 Being oppressed
He collected, the king also 377 The nineteen, the said, the heretic 555 The creation of emotion, the virtue
336
He is surrounded by a beautiful palace - 378 Six months, the essence, the jewels 40 Doubt, so others
266
He is always bound by suffering - 474 Six months, having taken refuge in Six, the said, forbidden, in 442 In short, the detailed
472 Six months, the last, in that 434 The assembly, the moon, she is - 234 He is the one who has the fortune of the wheel, marked 431 Sixty lakhs, the said, the age
He is afraid of the world, the said
138 He is the one with the white umbrella, the king of the earth, or the sixth, the name of the king of the earth
561 He is the one who destroys the world, the righteous
530 He is thoughtful, there, the Jina- 546 The sixth, then, the next, the sixth
He is a worldly being, he is finished, he said 467 He is the king of the Chetaka, the sixth fast, united 187 He is a worldly being, he is liberated, he said
24] He is not a scripture, even in the best 118
62
436
m
254
35
m
245
275
377

Page #661:
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:

Guna Bhadra jayati, Jaya Sena jayati, who is the excellent Jina Sena Acharya.
He is called Jaya Sena.
At the end of his life, he attained the great Chaitya along with the assembly of people.
In the doubt about the meaning, having attained the complete knowledge, he observed the three types of knowledge.
Observing him there itself, he acted in that terrible manner.
He came out from the midst of the assembly.
That was the cause of his origin.
Even though there was expenditure, the bondages remained.
She was affectionate and devoted, like the Meru mountain.
She was the wife of Vijaya Deva.
By that disrespect,
he was praised by those six limbs, and he went along with them, honoring all the Aryas.
Born in good families,
he immediately performed the true (action).
Your words are always compassionate, true, and without falsehood.
By the great goddess of truth,
the great king Satya Dhara,
Satya Dhara the great king gave this.
Even if there is truth, there would be no attachment, even in one's own youth.
Going to the house of Satya Bhama,
Satya Bhama became the daughter. Dedicated to Satya Bhama's son.
The wise Vyasa was born to Satya Vati. In Satya, he went in time. In that Satya, there was death. In the good ones to come, there was affection. Even in enjoyments, both good and bad are expressed by this one word.

He always serves the three worlds.
Going fearlessly, he was always vigilant like a deer.
Always considering the sound, the fourth unpleasant smell, the creature by its bad conduct and misery -
Quickly going as a messenger,
The messenger went to the king's house.
He is innumerable like the gods.
In the garden of the gods,
At the time of worshiping the gods, those who have properly grasped the spiritual accomplishments, by their gentle vision, and who are worthy of attaining the true dharma.
Immediately creating the flood,
Immediately they brought those two.
Immediately the virtuous one,
Immediately seeing the shaking,
Immediately in the case of that child,
Quickly going, he did that work.
He defeated the army of Jaya Naka.
Born immediately by the Jina, immediately attaining the memory of birth.
The group immediately turns back from us,
Immediately renouncing the cycle of rebirth,
Immediately in the charming garden,
Immediately fallen from the position of minister,
Immediately establishing the Yakshi, and he quickly -
Becoming the controller of possessions, virtuous, embodiment of radiance, worthy of compassion.

The wise one joined the company of the elders.
In the sixteenth year, the wise one.
The intelligent one, previously holding the eleven limbs of forbearance, graceful.
The king, being satisfied, gave to him.
The divine and human beings are the saints.
Forming the alliance with the ascetics,
Like the sun in the evening,
Let our warriors be armed in the battle and in the proximity.
Having performed the true guidance,
They are all attendants of that (one).
Contentment, humility, patience -
He again became near the end.
Abandoning the way of the world according to the rule,
Abandoning the way of the world properly,
He protects us on the side.
The seven sages or daughters,
Twenty-seven instruments,
The seventh day, the Yaksha's.
The seven sages or daughters,
The twenty-seventh instrument,
On the seventh day, the Yaksha's.

Page #662:
---------------------------
634
Mahapuraana Uttara Puraana
404
40
448
313
384 548
123
636
81
262
36.
160 238 261
Saptavimshativaaraashi Saptavyasana Sampanna Saptavyasana Samsakti Sapta Saptaati Kunthvaadi Sapta Sthana Gatau Khyaata Saptaapi Kaanane Anyedyusaaptaabhyupamitaayu:ko Saptaabhyupamitaayu: San Saptaarani Pramaanaanga Saprataapa Prabhevaabhaat Saprashrayam Prajaanaatha Saprashrayam Sameekshyanasaphala Sarvada Vrushti Sabalam Pitara Hatyā Sa Baala Vatsaya Dhenvaa Sa Baahyaabhyantara Shuddha Sabhayastāni Drushtavaakhya - . Sa Bhavyo Ativirakt: Sannaasabhaam Bhitvaa Khagesho Sabaarya Shreshthinam Maivasamam Jananya Sannaandisamam Praanairyam Tyaajyesamam Bhaanu Shva Sanjaatasamadam Bhoopateyatmasamanantara Mevaasy Samabhaavanaaya Trpyan Samabhaashata Maayaajno Samayujata Raamen Samarchito Mahadevaih Samarpyantaam Kaltraani Samavartiinaaran Sarvaan Samavasarana Lakshmya Samabhaanayataam Vaishya Samastavrata Sampanno Samastaahaadakenasi Samastaih Shaishvam Tasy Samaah Pancha Sahasronasamaakarnnya Samutpanna Samaakarshan Rajjvaayasamaagatya Tayo: Krutvaa Samaachaara Bahibhoosa
432 Samaadishatpura Garva 506 Sampadyatiirthakrinnaam 388 Samaadhiguptanaamaanam
423
Sampoojya Vanditum Yaanti 538 168
Samaadhigupta Maasaady 162,431 Sampurna: Kimyam Sharatchashdharah 64 Samaadhigupta Yogishe
Sampurnyayouvana Yaanti 406 Samaadhigupta Sanshashva
561
Sampooshya Palayaamaasa 361
Samaanaam Pancha Panchaashat 235 Samprucchhanti Sma Sarve Api 273 Samaanaam Saptaati Tasy 555 Sampratyapi Durukto Aham Samaapaadayadaakarnnya 356 Sampratyapratimaallau Vaa 168
Samaayutamitaatmaayu: 248 Sampravishyaayudhaagaaram 360 Samaaropitakodanda
Sampraaptvaan Kumaaro Api 453 Samaashliishya Sukhaprashna
Sampraaptardaasana Swapna 465 | Sameekshya Tam Jano Anyonyah 352 Sampraaptopaantyasanjnaanah Sameeksyaadaishika Prokta
355
Sampraapnuvanti Tatrate 172 Sameepam Prapya Bhaktyato
474
Samprapya Khechareshebhya - 356 Sameepe Chandanaaryaaya 527
Samprapya Gaganaabhogaam 188 Sameepe Tasy Tatsunu:
Samprapya Chitrakootaakhyam 261 Sameepe Ramadattaapi 112
Samprapya Jeevitasyantaam 72 Samuccaasana Maaropya
Samprapya Dharma Maakarnnya 360
456 157 Samutkrushtaashta Shuddhiiddha
Samprapya Bahavo Nopa
508 462 Samuttaanayitum Shaktaa
Samprapya Bhuktabhogaango 456 Samutpannamahaabodhih
Samprapya Merumaaropya
463 472
461 302 Samudgataikchhatraadi
Samprapya Patitastasmin 541
Samprapya Yuthamaaneshu Samudghatayya Sadvritta 417
542
Samprapya Youvanam Tanvi 452 106 Samudbhuten Tapasoh
226
Samprapya Raaghavaam Sopa - 266 Samudbhuto Ayamashliishya 227
Samprapya Sanayama Prapya 247 Samubhraanto Nivaaryo Anya - 506
Sampraapyopashama Bhaavam
406 Samudravijayaakhyaaya
Sampraarthy Vividhaahaaraan | 323 Samudravijayaadinaam
Sambandho Bandhubhih Ko Asau Samudravijayaadheesham
360 Sambhave Tava Lokaanaam 380 Samudravijayaaye Paati
Sambhavayatu Pingaa 32. Samudraseenanaamaanam
350 Sambhavayantamaatmaanam 284 Sa Munis Teerthanaathena
454 Sambhootparinaamen 270 Samunmoolya Nihantum Tam
Sambhoo ya Podanapure
127 Samupaavikhsadekatra
268 Sambhoo yetau Dvitiye Ahi Samupeti Rathaangesh 402 Sammatastai Maskartu
545 Samullanghi tamar yaada:
65
Sammedam Parvatam Prapya 214 Sametameva Samyaktva - 480 Sammedagiri Maasaady 83,123 Sambhavasyantara Jaate
Sammedaparvate Maasam 461 Sampattirvaa Charitrasya 411 Sammedashaila Maasaady
75 235
Sampadyate Na Vetyetad 268 Samyaktvamapare Sadhah 542 Samparka Manasa Matvaa 485' Samyaktvaadichatushake na 475
135
341
222
353
56
15
260
324
34
466,

Page #663:
---------------------------
Anukrama of Slokas:
635
275
454 1467 365 316 408
400
557
204
264
350
158
272 343 33
106
516
501 541 383 507
72
He who is devoid of right faith (samyaktva), aspires for right faith and other spiritual qualities, worships them with true devotion, and performs austerities with true knowledge (samyag-jnana) and right perception (samyag-darsana), attains the jewel of right perception (samyag-darsana-ratna). He, who is known for his sixteen-fold disciplined conduct (sila), reaches the state of spiritual union (yoga-bhava). He is adorned with the garland of virtues, wears the armor of jewels, and is honored by the king. The king's son, with devotion, seeks the refuge of his lotus feet. The sun and moon, the bees, and all the auspicious objects bow down to him. He is free from all impurities and is the essence of all that is auspicious. He is victorious everywhere, at all times, and in all ways. He desires the welfare of all beings. He is proficient in all languages and is summoned by knowledge. He is unique, with the head of a horse. All this is obtained from the teacher. He is the minister who is all-knowing and the lord of all worlds. The detached omniscient one is victorious everywhere. He desires the company of the undesirable. He is endowed with all the characteristic marks of perfection. He is surprised by the extraordinary. He is free from all attachments, yet possesses all wealth. At the end of life, he attains the state of equanimity. Having heard the teaching with attention, even the one with an arrow (in his body) becomes free from it. Hearing this, he too becomes free from the weapon. The god of peace grants all peace. She, the venerable one, is endowed with all the characteristic marks. Abandoning all attachments, he attains the highest bliss. The faith of the all-knowing one is the essence of all wealth. At the end of life, he attains the state of equanimity. Having heard the teaching with attention, even the one with an arrow (in his body) becomes free from it. Hearing this, he too becomes free from the weapon. The god of peace grants all peace. She, the venerable one, is endowed with all the characteristic marks. Abandoning all attachments, he attains the highest bliss. The faith of the all-knowing one is the essence of all wealth.

Page #664:
---------------------------
636
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
281
76
67
306
60
552
203
508
With thousands of kings,
246.  Famous in the world like Saankhya, etc. 546.  The essence of the kingdom, happiness, and thousands of ministers
436.  The teachings of Saankhya, etc. 476.  The essence of things 168.  With thousands of monks, 70, 221.  That tongue, that mind, that particle
The essence of joy, taking thousands of one, three knowledges
|  In the seven-wheeled chariot, it was - 342.  The essence of happiness, coming together with thousands of Yaksha protectors 230.  With seven-five auspicious things, happiness
The essence of Saraswati, etc., praise - 215.  With thousands of rays, along with 156.  She, hearing their fruit
The essence of worship, fourfold, being 433.  In the endless forest of thousands of mango trees, with gods, worship of the earth, etc.
With the essence, coming together equally... 243.  Thousands of lotus flowers in the hand, completely 228.
Without beginning and end, flawless, without beginning... 567.  With thirty kotis, counted, thousands of lotus flower chariots 67.  The means, gradually, released
183.  Along with two forty
135.  Half a thousand, a thousand, indeed 247.  They should fulfill, otherwise, pride, etc.
Along with sixteen months, at the end of the thousand, taking together
386.  Those months of the means
The essence of three, elevation
560.  With a thousand, the knowledge of the fourth
215.  The means, there, worthy of this 525.  The means, with golden wealth, that
458.  With a thousand, even non-scriptural, ordinary, yours, are not
The means, with your family
538.  With seven, along with
146.  The means, previous kotis, lifespan
Along with your own reason, obtained 558.  Thousands, taking refuge in
237.  The means, well-known, by this, it is said
535.
Universal prosperity, properly 227.  With your natural form
523.  The means, like a dog, they are pursued
With Lakshmi, all, worshipped by the immortals 426.  With the god, covered
536.  The means, the means, related
478.  With a definite victory, by that
376.  With the end of the kalpa, becoming here 543.  She, the Nagas, gave, evil intentions
With support, the word, hearing 150.  With me, I will go to Lanka
With me, doing, increase 306
175
She, entering, the moon-line, shining, helpers, also, of that, she, also, the time, wind, raised
She, to roam, the forest, gone 313
72.  Helpers, relatives, also, of that, she, also, the womb, child, cruelty
She, free from attachment, joy 507 363
235
She, the virtuous, Aryika, to, with, making a helper, worshipping
366.  She, also, seeing, the king of the earth, to rise 46 385
She, womanhood, not, understanding, helper, with, consulting, she, also, five, rituals 484
414.  She, also, Padmavati, patience
Boldness, see, enjoy, I, with helpers, accomplished work
66 405
Lion-banner, wearing, coronation 345.  With, necessarily, I, to them, she, also, her own husband, this 522
Lion-moon, of the sky, coming 115.  With, there is, no other, she, also, worn, ornaments, coming 484
Lion-moon, he became, today 112.  With, birth, of prosperity, by this, she, also, said, in them, my, desire 223
Lion-moon, the sage, also 114.  She, the story, which, hearing, she, also, said, in a good man, country 518
Lion-roar, then, making 222.  Completely, then, declared
She, also, said, sleeping, the king
466
Lion-playing, fierce, Saketa city, going
261.  She, awakening, the fruits, of the lord of the self
Lion-good, Sukambhoja 482.  Saketa city, lord 437.  She, coronation, by the gods, obtaining
335
Lion-expansion, middle, Saketa, lord, what, to you
260
Materials, being present, with 477.  Lion-valour, this, this, is said 451.  Saketa city, other, in
The difference of the means, the method of the means
Lion-army, great king
106.  Saketa city, coming
327.  Means, speech, compassion, mind
Lion-army, etc., of that, Saketa, glory, you
Means, etc., with gods - 460.  Lion-army, also, in time 112.  Directly, Lakshmi, like, eyes 506.  Means, etc., along with
Lion-army, the planet Saturn, edge 116.  Ocean, wealth-protector, named - 466.  Means, taking together 30, 104.  Lion-action, he, quickly 373.  Ocean, endless, wilderness
Means, etc., six, of 167.  Lion-throne, coming together 224.  Ocean-like, kotis, of 
Means, the benefit, difference
Lion-throne, sitting 165.  'Ocean-like, twenty
245.  Nearness, protection, joy - 274.  Lion-throne, sitting, lord, hill, on, thick - 226.  Kingdom, wealth, of that 207.  Lion, with, marriage,

Page #665:
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index:

128
351
262
COM
348
9 » Mmmmmmmmmmmmmmm NP
:11
M
Obtained by me, indeed, by a lion
464.  The name of happiness is that here, on the thirteenth of the bright fortnight, 126  To obtain a good subject, on the fourteenth of the bright fortnight,
Mouth-womb, victorious Shyama, to worship the Siddhakūta, 543  The feeling of happiness, sorrow, etc.  The Siddhabhūpaddhati of whom... 573  The essence of Dharma, the knowledge of the Siddha-Rākṣasa, 486  Enjoying happiness together, on the Siddha-mountain, sometimes, 184
Who knows the happiness of that one, the Siddārtha-shibika-deluded, 16  With the mouth, in the ninth month, the Siddārtha-sura-sammōdha,
With the mouth, by this wicked one, the Siddārtha, pervading samyaktva,
The Sugurudruma-named, the Siddha, Vaikatra, in the Ghatōkta,
A good grasp, with the palm of the hand, the Sindhu-Sindhu-khaga-etc. end,
Sugrīva, by Kumbhakarna, the Bhūbhṛt, in the Sindhyākhya-territory,
Sugrīva, Anumada-etc., the self-head-bound-evil-doer, 346
Sugrīva, the son of Anila, etc., the Sita, not to be taken, it is decided, 312
Sughoṣa, the Shataghoṣa-named, the Sita, to bring, from us,
Sughoṣa-vidyad-daṣṭrākhya, the Sita, mutually, the refuge-having,
Sughoṣa-hetu-obtained, the Sita, the virtuous, someone, 321
The cremation ground, also, not to be known, the Sita-etc., eight thousand,
Sūrta, the most suitable, thinking, the Sita, the ocean of courage, obtaining,
The son, to offer, the Sita, to place, thus, taken, she.  The son, in the kingdom, establishing, the Sita, by me, taken, it is said, what- 308  The son, the valiant hero, by the Sita-curse, the burning, that,
The daughter, also, the chariot-mounted, the Sita, the virtuous, this,
The daughter, the golden-garland, the Sita-eager, thus, going,
The daughter, the Kuvera-given, the Sita-udōkta-shore, the fort,
The daughter, the Dṛḍharatha-born, the Sīmaṅkara-muni, taking refuge,
The daughter, my, the beloved, of this, the hand, also, from that sorrow- 86  The daughter, of the immeasurable-speed, the Sīra-hand, that, seeing, 368  The daughter, the army-conquered, the Sīra-etc., beginning, the famous, the playful- 326  The daughter, to me, the Megha-sena, the Sīriṇa, also, not, here,
The daughter, to the learned-in-scripture, the sweet-voiced, the singers,
The carpenter, with, the light, the forest, the delicate, also, the un-distressed, 424  The carpenter, to me, the younger sister, the delicate, thus, naming,
423
The daughter, the Sagara-given, the delicate, the very fragrant- 423
The daughter, the Hiranyavati, was, the delicate, with the pot, with the pot,
The son, the lack of affection, to the husband, the Suketa, thus, all,
The son, the Gagan-sundā, the Suketa, indeed, the example,
The son, the Gotama-son, the Suketa-born, in gambling, 103  The son, the Dasharatha-named, the Suketa, in the victory-half, etc., 366  The son, in the queen, the Prabhaṅkari, the Suketa-shelter-arrow,
The son, my, this, the Rāgaṇa,
.
.
26.  The son, the Yakṣa-etc., given, in, 360  The son, in the Gaja-pura, the caste, 122.  The son, the Vijayarāma-named, 236  The son, of this, your, the husband, 364
The son, those two, the youth-full.  185 524
The son, the daughter, were born, the star, 408 66  The Sudatta, by that, the un-distressed,
182 235
The Sudatta, the name, of that, was, 533
The beautiful-to-see, the heroine, the approach, 352
The Sudūtama, the Indu-named, 144
The Sudharma-gana-servant, the, 537 321
The Sudharma-end, the knowledge, 537 321
The Sudharma-named, that, the elder, 316
The Sudharma, the Kevali, the Jambū, 537 156
The Sudharma-ācārya, obtaining,
The Sudhī, how, the happiness-portion, desiring? 173  The Sudhī, the Madana-speed, also,
162 504  The Sudhī, the beautiful-garden,
135 312
The Sananda, the Nanda-disease, the, 342
The Nanōtākhya, also, the Shōna, also,
The Sundā, was born, of that, 345
The Supāśva, the silence, taking, the virtuous, the suitable, seeking,
The Supta, the Para-māṇikya, 534 183 532
The Suprakāra-pura-lord, 424
The Supratiṣṭha-jina-approach, 353
The Supratiṣṭha-maha-gaja, 182  The Supratiṣṭha, also, in that, the kingdom,
342  The Suprabhāga-ṇī-pā,
The Suprabhāya

Page #666:
---------------------------
638
Mahapuraana, Uttara Puraana
11
Name
343
Ar
Ar
GMOK
.
L
186
He God
33
"
36
God Wedding
234
226
m
SUw,
1 mro
m
Sumitro Dhanamitro'nyasumukhaaksharapadmaisch Sumukho naama tannnaiva suraḥ Saudharmikalpe'nusurange samavasthaapya surateshu vilajattvaṃ suradundubhinighopaṃ suradevaadiguravantasuramyavishayantasshurabhyavishayekhyaatasuramyavishayephodaneśaḥ surabhyavishayeraṃye suralokaadīmām lokamindre suraḥ ke'tra naraḥ ke vā suraḥ padmaavati biya suraḥ sarve'pi nasvainasuraḥ Saudharmamukhyaast suraashas tasya naabhuvan suraadhimalayodyane suraadheeshaḥ svahasten sura nirvaanakalyanasuraashtravardhanaakhyasya suraastatra samaagatya surupaam baalikaa vikshya surupaakhyasutaa vidyusurupaa vasudhaa devi surendrajalaṃ jaalaantasurendrenaasyadugdhaabdhisurendrarmandarasyaante suraiḥ sampraaptatatpujo suraireeḍhaa samaaruhhya surastadanasantuṣṭaisuraistritiyakalyanapujaa sulaksanaayaam tasyaabhuut sulochanaadyaaḥ patrimśan suvarnagajavatyau cha suvarnaatilakaasaad suvarnaatejasaa pritisvarnaatejaa naamnaabhrusvarnaatejaastasmaach
510 | Suvarnadaarakon naama 38 Suviraktan vanesho'sau
Suvihitamahaapaayau 564 Suvrataa yaayikaabhyaashe
Susaptaparamasthaana
Susiddhamuninirdisht. Susiimaa kundalaa saarddha
Musiimaananagaraṃ tasmin 362 Susthitaakhyaguruṃ praapy
Susthitaa'sine saapi 348 Susvapnapoorvakam jyeshtho
Sunave dhanadaakhyaaya 68
Sunuḥ kunikabhoopasya 446
Sunurm mamaika evaayam 163
Sunurvijayabhadro'sya
Sunustayoḥ pratiyo'bhuut 464
Sooni banarathe raajyam
Suupaakaro'pi kaalaante 238
Soorraseno maharaajah Sooryakaantasamudbhut Sooryaachandramasau jitya
Sooryaachandramasau sainhikeyo 401
Sooryaavarte tapo yaate
Senayorubhayogasiit 276
Senaapati samapraakshit
Sevyamanaḥ sada raktaḥ 256 Sevyastejasvibhiḥ sabai
Sainyayorubhayoraasiit saihikeyanigirka
Sodhu tadakshamaḥ kachhi30
Sodhu tanujayorduhkha
Sodasinghopaso'sau 60
Sodavaa vyaadhakrutam 123 Sotsavaḥ sahasodasthaa182
Sotsavaah praapaayantī sm | So'nuttaravimaaneshu
। So'anviitastadbhayaanmuktvaa । 187 Sopadesham dhritam sarvam514 So'patraaso giraau samme512 So'pi kaalaantaare buddhi
So'pi kopanahaavishta
534 | So'pi gatvaa bhavadvaarta 514 So'pi jnaataanubhaavattvaa173So'pi tam pratigrihya, 468 364 So'pi tajjnaayate kinchhi- 508 162 So'pi tattattvasadbhaava 244 227 । So'pi tatsambhramam drishṭyaa 461
So'pi tadgaganikaavaarta 116 So'pi tadurvachaḥ shrutiyaa 133 So'pi tasya upari sthitvaa 546
So'pi tenaiva danden 410
So'pi tenoprudhhaḥ san. 364
So'pi divyo gajo gatvoḥ । 344 471 So'pi duscharitasyaasya 313 532 । So'pi paapaḥ svayam krodhaah
556 143 So'pi prakatitaatmiya 418 178 So'pi praageva baddhaayu 322 121 So'pi bheto gato duuram 371 63 So'pi yadyavametasya 116
So'pi yakshamanuusmriitya 508 4 So'pi vigro'tidaaridrathaḥ
So'pi vyaapaarayayaasa 365 167 So'pi ratnaprabhaam gatvaa
556 So'pi shauryapuraṃ gatvaa
362 So'pi shridharasaannidhye 2.6
So'pi santushya siddhaartho
So'pi sannihitastatra 516 126 So'pi sampraaptasammaana- 453 104 So'pi sampraapy saamagree- 530 326 । So'pi sarvasahishnuḥ 107 556
So'pi svaavadhibodhe So'pyadaanimudrikaa kaama So'pyadya tava sodayo
So'pyanyascha munetam 320
So'pyevam abravītpraapt- 543 236 So'braviit tava niryaanakale 234 Somadatto nripastasmai 356 Somadatto nripo gauraḥ 263 Somadevaḥ sunirvidy
422 311 Somadevo dvijo'traiva
422 Somaabhuutiścha vedaanga
422 62 Somavanshasamudbhūtaḥ 216
or
wm2
126
55
Sapan
162
J
117
503
488

Page #667:
---------------------------
##  Verses and their order:

**111**
**265**
**520**
**388**
**130**
**152** Somaśrī, her beloved
**154**  Standing, a rooster's feather
**265** Soma's gain, feeding her
**487** Standing, the life-breath of her
**504**  Standing, freely, for a long time, playing
**484**  Soma's gain, to whom enmity was done
**463**  Standing, to free, that Nand
**363**  Standing, they are well, there
**155**  Courtesy, brothers, Dharma
**103**  Standing, he lives, raised up
**258**  Self-initiation, the constellation
**247**  Courtesy, is destroyed, by falling
**348**  Standing, here, inactive, for a month
**563**  Standing, two days passed
**476**  Self-born, rising, burden
**525**  Standing, in the Saudharma Kalpa, the shining one, there
**284**  Standing, in the Saudharma Kalpa, the god was
**563**  Standing, in the sixth fast
**207**  Self-name, hearing, drying up
**163**  In the Sauvarma Kalpa, Śrīṣeṇa
**372**  Standing, with firm feet, he entered
**41**  Self-foot, nail, crossing
**317**  Standing, with firm, fierce, taste, immediately
**317**  Self-foot, dancing, for the sake of entertainment
**63**  Standing, with firm feet, auspicious
**377**  Standing, with firm, high, white, led
**486**  Standing, in the Saudharma palace, the end is rejected
**532**  Standing, in the pillar-house, he was
**448**  Self-grandfather, in the abandonment
**376**  Standing, in the Saudharma, the swing, swaying
**166**  Standing, pillars, thick, ripe, fruits, rising
**465**  Standing, in the form of a large Vetāla
**216**  Standing, the ocean of beauty, this
**138**  Self-son, student, in the feeling, courtesy, knowledge of the world
**176**  Standing, the shoulders, in their momentary nature
**261**  Standing, bathed, adorned, pure
**383**  Self-previous, done, merit
**302**  Standing, breast, birth, thus
**468**  Standing, bathe, the mind, concentrate
**186**  Standing, breasts, strong, pressure
**386**  Standing, daughter-in-law, by envy, work
**188**  Self-previous, birth, connection
**101**  Standing, still, darkness, meditation, destroyed
**386**  Self-previous, birth, connection
**422**  Standing, praised, then, praised
**511**  Standing, praised, then, praised
**566**  Standing, desiring, to please, the person
**205**  Standing, dreams, Krishna's second
**336**  Standing, dreams, after
**160**  Standing, praising, the good, praising
**186**  Standing, praising, self-birth, connection
**68**  Standing, dreams, what is the fruit of this
**265**  Standing, dreams, seeing, rising
**541**  Standing, clearly, hearing, knowing
**47**  Standing, women, the world's beloved
**317**  Standing, shining, pain, sword, ray
**136**  Standing, dreams, even, by some, mind
**420**  Standing, women, with all qualities, worthy
**136**  Standing, remembering, the Devakumāra, named
**266**  Standing, self-influence, shining
**286**  Standing, women, experiencing, them
**26**  Standing, womanhood, being-womanhood, one
**136**  Standing, remembering, with a thousand, years
**452**  Standing, remembering, the deity, should be remembered
**253**  Self-birth, other, connection
**401**  Standing, women, and, such, quality, possessed
**41**  Standing, smiles, variations, Sarasvati
**205**  Standing, smiles, then, self-victory, he
**376**  Standing, self, house, coming
**512**  Standing, women, creation, even, the conqueror
**403**  Standing, smiles, previous, birth, heap
**294**  Standing, self, house, come, Lakshmi
**542**  Standing, place, they, blame
**447**  Standing, remembering, alas, blaming
**512**  Standing, place, shift, happiness, cut
**326**  Standing, established, climbing
**512**  Standing, established, he, on the head
**418**  Standing, would be, to the village, able
**256**  Standing, self, fallen, leaf
**224**  Standing, firm, not, knowledge, dispassion
**481**  Standing, firm, mind, discerning, truth
**238**  Standing, firm, mind, deluded
**500**  Standing, would be, enmity, you, certainly
**531**  Standing, firm, I will, this, hearing
**265**  Standing, self, by the entourage, even
**561**  Standing, self-radiant, and, all-being
**411**  Standing, self-radiant, knowledge
**464**  Standing, firm, to make, a ball, below
**164**  Standing, self-thought, that, praise, hearing
**405**  Standing, firm, that, nourishing, yoga
**102**  Standing, self-wheel, like, her
**523**  Standing, self-radiant, named, god
**412**  Standing, self, before, even, him, to kill
**67**  Standing, self, before

Page #668:
---------------------------
640
Self-blood in the absence of blood
Self-marriage in the ocean self-marriage method in that self-marriage competition, self-obtained by the gods, self-to be self-desired
Self with his own family
Self-self-glory-self-self-interest, self-to be a flood named self-taking, self-producing bondage, self-produced by the gods, self-bird king, self-glory-named Tirthesh-

Self-glory and seeing him, self-glory-husband, self-glory-also righteous, self-glory-what is the mind
Self-born, self-directed, self-born-Keshava-wealth, self-born-I will be today, self-voice-village-etc. righteous
Self-kingdom-grain, to be served
Self-kingdom, given to you
Self-kingdom, to the king of the age, self-kingdom-taking doubt, heaven, what kind of is this, going to heaven, by sacrifice, heaven-world, and that house, heaven-world, victory-born, from heaven, Khadira-essence, even
wa
From heaven, then, Indra, self-spoken-vessel, Bhushna-na, heaven-liberation-yo
Mahapuraana, Uttarapuraana
525
227
24
215
107
465
226
563 66
167
530
Self-in this way, self-satisfied, self-effort-this, self-hand-all-king-spa, self-pain-prevention-serpents 354, self-eye-born, self-teacher-best, following, benefit-anu- 277. Self-yoga, third-ddh. Van-attracted, people, all, self-inner-house-family, self-born-immortal-disease, self-master-minister, people-place, self-life-end, to be taken out, self-life-end, to be worshipped, self-life-end, born, self-life-eight, self-life-fourth-part-remaining, self-interest, deer-anger-sound, beautiful
484
363
71
14 1
51
156
144
141
144
Self-interest, ocean-Meru,
104 Self-territory-decided, self-limit, territory-movement
#
| Self-accepting, this, even, other, self-accepting, previous, dress, self-made, honey, sorrow, self-spoken-evidence, goddess-from, appearing-after, world-other, self-benefit, self-increase, self-use-purpose, self-means, then, ask
[ 6 ] Swan-row, doubt, force, Krishna, that-brought, rooster-even, killed-enemy-four, gathered, that, afraid-Vaitali, killed, club-stone, killing, you, path-over, killing-cover, knowledge, to kill, that, even, knowing, killing, tooth-end-crossing, horse-neck, even, birth-end, Hari, peaceful-inner-being,   Hari-Chandra-here, lion-deer-I-I-stopped, Hari-ye, desired-jewel, Hari-dynasty-clean-sky, Hari-armor-here
Hari-power-from, after, Hari-arrow, done-all, Hari-arrow, even, taking, Hari-Hari-day-sun, to take, not, Sita, even

161
503
257
504
૨૪૨
471
246
386
46
૨૪
435
136
471
203
84
554
377
463
Pu.
333
434
40 1
218
Heaven-descent, auspicious, heaven-world, peaceful-mind, heaven-world, is done, by us, self-lotus-entered, self-crooked-j-entered, self-speech-net, self-livelihood-following, even, self-increase, enemy-killing, even, self-falling, endless-refusal, self-born-righteous-devotion, self-sister, daughter-in-law, even, self-army, with-means, self-in, self-in, quality-place 55, self-giving, praise
283
163
206
L
118
361
Self-jewel-effect, self-self-master-benefit-named, self-self-marriage-for, going
77
473
432 - 356
287
364
336
142. Hand-holding, this,
283 |
455
331
364
42
73
457
Killed-after-end-other, protection
Loss-wealth, that, righteous-vessel, call, mouth-lotus, this, laughter, even, jewel-pro-ha-has-ti-na-kh-pur, reaching, killing-named, city, that, violence-etc. five, dharma, violence-etc. fault-far, from, violence-dharma, leaving
Violence-dharma, deciding, violence-falsehood, not-righteous-Rama- 1, violence, main-shastra-from, even, violence-in, this, root-meaning, violence-meaning, fame-word, even, violence, dharma, this, fame 488 | Benefit, Lanka-lord, to us
77
357
Himalaya-ocean-bank
62 218
14
320 448
406
125 267 ૩૯૭
154
366
225
314
420
361
147
This-back, assembly-middle, plow-bearer-two, yoga, with
Ila-weapon, great-jewel   Plow-weapon, even, that-sorrow, laughing, even, crying, even, hand-grasp, like, self, hand-picture-named, above, hand-tip-middle, hand-with, to-be-made-courage-from
456
561
315
261
400
113
563 | Gold-dharma, lotus
That-na-kh-pur-lord, killed-after-protection-middle
ve
306

Himalaya, great-Himal

Page #669:
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:

48.61
48.63
What is the reason for not throwing the Lakshmibhavana (the state of liberation) into the Moksha (liberation)? 48.33 By what reason does it not attain the cause of death? The enemies do not stand firm in the Vritva (old age). That is appropriate for the wise. Even with the beneficial, the knowers of the order do not do the unpleasant. Youth is to be consumed, life diminishes moment by moment. Who is the impure, sinful, unbearable, the receptacle of sorrow?

48.91 Whose Ushayas (desires) are not a cause of sorrow for the wise?

48.65 48.85
48.95
48.96
48.104
48.117
48.108
48.131
48.136
The knowledge of the Kaminas (lovers).
The Vidhesha (God)'s Pitrus (ancestors) are of pure lineage. What do they not do, not being proud?
The Slokas (verses) residing in the Uttara Purana.
As long as the Maya (illusion) of the friends is not seen, they remain in the house, not the cause.

4.94
The service for others is mostly for the satisfaction of the elders. The Jantus (beings) within it are deluded by the life. Due to delusion, without attachment, do not think of the bitter.
Life itself is the Antaka (death), the other Antaka (death) is spoken by others. The Jantus (beings), not knowing that, love the endless Antaka (death).

49.31 The one intoxicated by the passion consumes the tasteless, the tasteful, the Vishaya (objects of senses) devoid of the three Gunas (qualities), shame on the intellect without beginning and end.

The conduct of those who are like the Parjanya (cloud) is the giver of happiness to the whole world. What do the wise not attain?

49.33 49.54
50.12 They alone, who are the Lokahitavaha (benefactors of the world), where to go? 50.37 The growing Parda (veil) is not prohibited equally. 50/43 Reaching the Sadhava (virtuous) place, who does not stay in their own? 51.54 Who is not dear to the impartial?

51.62
How can the Asvasta (unwell) have happiness?

51.67 That Pati (husband) is capable of shaking the Marummer (desert). 52/8 Neither Saubhagya (good fortune) nor Apabhagya (misfortune) is obtained. 52.31 The Sudeva (good god) kingdom is the giver of happiness to the subjects. 52.40 What is born from the Patradana (charity)? 52.54 The women are the creepers of the Samsara (worldly life), the Satputras (good sons) are the fruits of that.

54.45 He who did not see the lotus-like face of the son, by the divine grace. What is the use of seeing the Shatkhanda-Shrimukha (six-part beautiful face)? 54.46 The ornament of the women is the Lavata (beauty), the other is the non-ornament.

54.154
81

The appearance of the Tanuja (son) is not for the satisfaction of anyone. 54.60 The Tanuja (son) is the ornament of the family.

54.93
54.99
The Punya (merit) that is connected to Punya, some are protected by someone.

54.1103
The Ananya (unparalleled), what is the use of those devoted to the Sadanushthana (good conduct)?

54.121
What is the happiness if not from oneself? What is this Lakshmi (wealth) if it is unstable? What is youth if it is temporary? What is life if it is limited?

54.205 The Sadbuddhi (good intellect) is the giver of Siddhi (accomplishment).

54.213 56.11
Who is not powerful in the force of time?

58.73
58/74
58.100
The Ragi (passionate) binds the Karmas (actions), the Bandha (bondage) is the cause of the Samsara (worldly life). 58.34 When the Pushya (auspicious) has gone, who has not taken anything here? The Dantamango (tusk) of the Gajendra (king of elephants), the Damshrango (tusk) of the Gajadri (female elephant). The human being does not praise the greatness of the earth.
The Dustamashivisha (deadly poison) growing in the house, who can bear it? The satisfaction of others is for one's own satisfaction. There is no other addiction worse than the Yuta (gambling). Therefore, one who desires both should abandon the Yuta (gambling) from a distance.

59.81 The Samskara (impression) born from Preeti (love) and Apriti (dislike) becomes stable. Therefore, the one who knows the self should not do even to anyone.

59/67
59/75
59/91
What cannot be achieved from the result of good deeds?

59/97
The Asvasta (unwell) is not difficult to obtain from the house. 59.115 Who himself drinks the Visavriksha (poisonous tree) tied up? 59.125 Who is the Bandhu (relative), who is the new Bandhu (relative)? The Bandhuta (relationship) is the two Bandhuta (relationships). In the Samsara (worldly life), how can the desire for knowledge be turned around? This itself is the fruit of studying the Arthashastra (science of polity) constantly. That which falls, is not tied too much by others.

The words of those established in Sadbhava (good disposition) have no Vidambhyata (contradiction).

59.139
What is the heroism of the one who kills the sleeping one climbing on his lap?

59.162 Even in the difficult task, they do not abandon the effort with good speech.

59.165
The acceptance of the wealth of another by unjust means is called Aryamuchyate (praiseworthy).

59.178 What is the wonder of the Anginas (embodied ones)?

What do the Satvika (virtuous) not do?

59.191 59.246
The Spargo (attachment) is for the enjoyment of Dharma, like a Kachaya (small) of the great Mani (gem).

59.160

Page #670:
---------------------------
642
Uttarapurana is a worthless book, a corrupter of Dharma.
59.27. These are the bonds, these are the misfortunes for those who are attached to wealth. Dharma is the true friend.
59.270. What is given to a fool is not given to a wise man. What is given to a fool is not given to a wise man.
63.228. ... "Dhavitaana, up nikhilammadhyalam. 61.3. Anger is also considered to be a stain. 63.254. Universal good character, compassion, and courage.
Often, like the Kalpadruma, the righteous strive for the highest. 63.299. Wealth, beauty, and fame are all transient. 63.308. It is better to give up even a treasure than to accept it beforehand. 63.309. Good character, knowledge of the world, and the ability to control the senses are the qualities of a wise man. 62.3.4. A man who is dishonored has no place in heaven or hell. 55.78. He who is devoted to the crossing of the ocean of Samsara.
He who is devoted to the crossing of the ocean of Samsara. 65.137. He who is endowed with the qualities of a good listener is said to be a good listener. 62.1. What is the use of a mouth that does not speak the truth?
65.148. Good birth, good health, good age, good knowledge, and a good body.
65.564. The thoughts of the virtuous perish. 66.11. Who is the greatest here? Who is the most powerful here?
62.164. The desire for worldly things is a great temptation even for the wise. 66.4. The emergence of the banyan tree is like the emergence of the banyan tree.
62.119. In prosperity, the wise man does not become arrogant. 66.82. In times of crisis, the wise man does not lose his composure. 62.137.
It is right to follow the law, not to follow one's own desires. 67.1. ... Sparik Srimaashayat.
67.102. Who would delay in the face of death? 62.198.
67.109. The punishment of the wicked is to be seen, to be heard, and to be felt. 62.336.
67.111. Even a right hand that is wicked should be cut off. 62.331.
67.4238. There is no hell for the wicked, no heaven for the virtuous.
67.318. It is by virtue alone that one gains the love of all. 62.344.
67.7321. He who is attached to worldly things is like a bird that is caught in a trap.
68.57. As long as there is virtue, there is courage. As long as there is virtue, there is courage. 68.77. A father who is attached to his son is like a poison that kills him. 62.347.
68.1.1. The ways of the world are many and varied.
62.356. Where is the Milky Way? Where is the great ocean? 62.439.
68.103. The loss of time is a great loss. 62.42.
68.112. The wise man does not lose his wealth even in times of adversity. 62.508.
68.117. The wicked man is a thief of the property of others. 63.49.
68.138. Anger is sometimes pleasant. 63.129.
68.140. Anger is never found in the wise. 63.130.
68.146. The wise man increases his own greatness even if he is hated by others. 63.4133.
68.18. The cause of the downfall of the wicked is their pride. 63.175.
68.185. The wicked man is like a dead man, even though he is alive. 63.222.
68.19. The earth is able to hold the ocean, but it is not able to hold the mind of a woman. 63.226.

Page #671:
---------------------------
The liberated souls are gone from the past.
68.202
Where are the breaths of the virtuous? They are not the breaths of the wicked, they are the breaths of the beloved.
38:221
The victory of the virtuous is always fruitful. 68.230
68.235
68.263 Truth is spoken. It is a great sin. 68.267
The wise man, who is eager to achieve his goal,
68.315
The ignorant man, anger, addiction, and obstacles to work.
Who can be equal to a virtuous wife? 68 328
It is often corrupted by something. 68350
Food is the means of all, God is the means. 68357
The wicked will perish of their own accord. 68.401
Who is the preventive of future consequences? 68435
The grateful praise friendship in a definite act.
68.438 66.484
Without God, where is prosperity?
Abduction of another's wife is a sin that is difficult to overcome. 68.484
Work done with the help of others is not a matter of shame for the proud. 68.528
The wicked, like a withered flower, will perish in the future. 68.529
The unchaste will be deluded by the illusion of merit. * The wicked are of a low nature, they are fond of mutual slander and prohibition. 68.641
The virtuous are always followers of thought.
68530 68.630
68642
By what are the virtuous pleased?
What is the consideration of those who are full of love and sorrow?
70.129 70.21
The wicked do not know their own right and wrong actions. 70.286
Indeed, the virtuous have their own great sages. 70.304
The virtuous are indeed speakers of truth.
What do they do?
What do the virtuous not do? What do the ascetics not do?

70325 70/343
70.348 70.364
The wise man is silent. The wicked, who are full of evil thoughts, are angry, what do they not do? 70.368
The wise men are deluded in inevitable actions. 70 379
The powers of the gods are like weapons, like Indra's weapons, in the case of those who have seen the deeds of others. 70:426
They are the protectors of the people, they are the destroyers of the wicked. 70464
The virtuous are silent. 71.17
With virtue, who is a friend?
71.21
Even a large group of aquatic beings, endowed with power, is destroyed by the combination of attachment, ego, and delusion. 71140
Who is not affected by evil deeds by lust? 71144
The wicked are corrupt. 71.196
The three poisons are not destroyed even for the yogis. 71.299
The powers of the various substances are diverse. 71.346
What is the cause of the destruction of the nameless deeds?
71.274
Who does not go to the state of contentment, which is the cause of growth? 71.398
From the science of the Himalayas, from the kingdom, or from the victory of policy. The loss of the left path.
72.88
The wise man does not act without the command of God. 72103
The virtuous have fear or hope.
Those who have attained the state of liberation are victorious everywhere. The victory of those who have accumulated virtue in the past is not difficult to obtain. The Jinas are not liars.
Shiva himself protects the relatives, the cause of bondage, and the means of liberation.
643
1
72.110
72126
72.175
What does not bring about welfare, the gathering of those who have accumulated virtue? 73189
The wise are knowers of the sequence. 73.12.
The wise man should consider the appropriate association of women. 7416
What is the purification of the soul? 74/63
Even the harm done by the low is a benefit to the virtuous. 74.110
Who can reject the opposition without obtaining the power of time? 74.209
The nature of the master is often manifested. 74217
In great fear, no one else stands beside the great. 74293
From virtue, there is great happiness in heaven. 74.193
What does not good company do?
The fruits of accumulated virtue bear abundant fruit. The path of God is crooked.
72.222
7318 7353
The gods go to help the virtuous like a flower to a deer. No one can understand him, he is dancing and playing.

The virtuous wish to do good, like a mother to her child. If there is no similarity, they do not praise the virtues of the virtuous.
74546
74478
Anger is the cause of destruction, anger destroys. Anger causes the loss of the kingdom, anger causes misfortune.
74.546
75163
75/75
75.125

Page #672:
---------------------------
644
Uttarapurana, anger is the mother of anger, and anger leads to hell. There is no reason for a fight with a strong person. 75.1599 Therefore, it is better to abandon anger, says the Jina. 75.654
Victory everywhere is auspicious, what is there to wonder about? 75.654
75.1126 Those who have enjoyed their pleasures are free from desires, they are the lords of the world. 75.135
75.1682 Excessive affection leads to the wrong path. 75.165 For whom is Dharma not for happiness?
75.688 Sorrow is not for the virtuous, nor for the pure in heart. 75.187 The virtuous are obstacles to happiness.
75.145 Joy is the cause of destruction.
75.233 The virtuous do not respect those who teach the path of liberation. 76.213 The paths are different for different beings, due to their karma. 75.4240 Even in a treasure trove, a person without merit will not find a jewel. 76.219 In a field, a seed will not sprout without proper care, what will a wise person not do? 75.284 What will a hero not do?
76.330 Oh, what will not happen in front of you?
75.336 Sometimes, something happens, without a cause, there is no other reason for it, it happens due to the combination of things. 75.437
76.380 What will not virtuous friends do in times of trouble? 75.443 Those who are influenced by Dharma do not tolerate its destruction. 75.501 A fool, even if he gets a jewel, will only consider its name. 75.501 There is no Dharma without a trace of fault. 76.416 That friendship is true which is tested in times of trouble. 75.576 Dharma is the mother, Dharma is the father, Dharma is the protector, Dharma is the benefactor. 75.580 Untimely wealth is not beneficial. 75.580 Dharma is the lord of the world, Dharma is the pure and unshakable path. 76.417 Self-praise and criticism of others are no different from death. 75.599 The destruction of Dharma is the destruction of the virtuous, therefore, the destruction of Dharma is the worst sin. 75.599 Those who protect the virtuous, protect the world. 76.418

Page #673:
---------------------------
## Glossary of Terms

**Muni:** A Jain monk.

**Five Wonderful Acts During Giving:** 1. Rain of Jewels, 2. Sound of Divine Drums, 3. Rain of Flowers, 4. Flow of Gentle Fragrant Wind, and 5. Sound of "Ahodana Ahodana".

**Ashtaahniki Puja:** A special eight-day festival celebrated in the months of Kartik, Phalgun, and Ashadh. During this festival, the 52 Jain temples located on Nandishwar Dweep are worshipped.

**Aghatikarma:** Four types of karmas that are not destroyed by liberation: 1. Vedaniya, 2. Ayu, 3. Name, and 4. Gotra.

**Animādiguṇa:** Eight types of supernatural powers: 1. Animā, 2. Mahimā, 3. Garima, 4. Lahimā, 5. Prāpti, 6. Prākaṁya, 7. Ishitva, and 8. Vashitva.

**Anuyoga:** The division of Jain scriptures based on their subject matter. There are four types: 1. Prathamānuyoga, 2. Karaṇānuyoga, 3. Caraṇānuyoga, and 4. Dravyānuyoga.

**Amīkṣṇajñānopyoga:** One of the sixteen types of meditation.

**Amūḍhaṣṭhitā:** One of the components of Samyak Darshan (right faith).

**Avagāḍhahak:** One of the ten types of Samyaktva (right conduct), arising from knowledge.

**Ajñānamithyātv:** The state of false belief that arises from ignorance about the true nature of karma, punya, papa, and dharma.

**Arthaj:** One of the types of Samyak Darshan.

**Bhavasanma:** A type of corrupt being.

**Ashtaguna:** Eight qualities that manifest in a Siddha (liberated soul) after the destruction of the eight karmas: 1. Knowledge, 2. Vision, 3. Uninterrupted Bliss, 4. Right Conduct, 5. Penetration, 6. Subtlety, 7. Weightlessness, and 8. Vigor.

**Ashtaanga Nimittagyan:** Eight types of knowledge that arise from dreams: 1. Antariksha, 2. Bhouma, 3. Anga, 4. Swar, 5. Vyanjan, 6. Lakshana, 7. Sinna, and 8. Swapna.

**Ahamindra:** The gods who reside in the sixteenth heaven. They are all equal in their splendor and there is no distinction between king and subjects.

**Agambhakti-Pravachanbhakti:** One of the types of meditation.

**Achaamlavardhan:** A special type of fast.

**Aagnasamudbhav:** One of the types of Samyak Darshan.

**Adisanhann:** A type of body structure.

**Aadimasansthan:** A type of body structure.

**Aay Sansthan:** A type of body structure.

**Aavashyakaparinhaani:** One of the types of meditation.

**Ashray Patrak:** A type of garment worn by great monks.

**Iryadipanchak:** Five types of activities: 1. Walking, 2. Speech, 3. Eating, 4. Taking and Giving, and 5. Establishing.

**Upadeshottha:** One of the types of Samyak Darshan.

**Upvrinhan:** One of the components of Samyak Darshan.

**Upasakakriya:** The practices of a Shravak (lay follower).

**Ubhayanaya:** A type of knowledge that accepts one of the many contradictory aspects of a substance based on the context. It has two types: Vyavahar (practical) and Nishchay (definitive).

Page #674:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**646**
.. [A] A single dharma in the substance of the form of ekant mithyatva-dravya-paryaya. To be certain of it 61||300 The difference in the form of ekadasanga-dvadasanga, eleven angas- 1.  Yacharang, 2.  Mutrakritanga, 3.  Sthananga, 4.  Samavayanga, 5.  Vyakhyaprajnapti, anga, 6.  Jnatridharmarathanga, 7.  Upas. Kadhyayananga, 8.  Antakriddasanga, 9.  Anunaroshaadika damanga, 10.  Vipaksutraanga, and 11.  Prashnavyakarananga, these are called dvadasanga by the inclusion of 12th drishtivadanga. 48.12
Kanasheekar- The rain of clouds for days is called kanasheekar.
58.28 Kanakavali- A fast of the upvasaka.
Uttarapurana- Karmaanvaya-rak kriya, their detailed description is to be seen in the second part of Mahapuraana.
63.302 Kalpavrisha- A special worship done by the Grihaspati Chakravarti.
72.59 Five arrows of Kama- 1.  Tarpan, 2.  Tapana, 3.  Mohan, 4.  Vilapana, 5.  Maran, 72.119 Kusheel- A type of corrupt muni.
76.193 Krinkaaditrik- Created, caused,
Hanumodan. 73.111 Kevala- Kevala jnana, all dravyas
and knowing their paryaya, the most excellent jnana. 61.43 Kaivalyanavaka- Nine powers obtained by the nine.
72.191 Ksheerasravadidhi- A riddhi whose effect is that milk starts flowing from dry food. 59.257.
[G] - Gananathamki- Acharya bhakti is a
feeling. 63.327 Gatichatushtaya- Naraka, Tiyach, Manushya and Dev, these are called Gatichatushtaya. 53.18 Garbhanvayakriya- Their detailed description is to be seen in the second part of Mahapuraana. 63.302 Guptyadishatk- Gupti, Samiti, Dharma, Anupreksha, Parisha, Jap and Charitra, these are called Guptyadishatk. They bring about samvara.
52.155 Prathay- Two types of parigraha, based on the difference of antaranga and bahiranga.
67.413 [Gh] Pati- Jnanavarana, Darshanavarana, Moramor Basray, these are the 14.
Niya. Of these, the destruction of mahaka daman gunampaana is in the end, and the destruction of the remaining three is in the anas.
5||228 [Ch] Seven ratnas of Chakraanta (Narayana)- 1.  Ami, 2.  Das, 3.  Dhanush, 4.  Chakra, 5.  Shakti, 6.  Dar and 7.  Gada, 62.1148 Chaturdasha Maharatan- There are 14 ratnas of the 14th. 1.  Sudarshan Chakra, 2.  Patra, 3.  Khang, 4.  Dand, 5.  Kakini, 6.  Charma, 7.  Chudamani, 8.  Purohit, 9.  Senapati, 10.  Sthati, 11.  Grihapati, 12.  Kanya, 13.  Gaj and 14.  Ashva.
61.195 Chaturvidha Bandha- 1.  Prakriti, 2.  Sthiti, 3.  Anubhaga and 4.  Pradesh, these are the four types of bandha.
58.31 Chaturvidhaamar- 1.  Bhavanaasi, 2.  Vyantar, 3.  Jyotishka and 4.  Vaimanika, these are the four types of dev. 55.51 Chaturthajnana- Manahparyayajnana, the following five types of jnana are: 1.  Matijnana, 2.  Shrutijnan, 3.  Avadhijnana, 4.  Manahparyayajnana and 5.  Kevalajnana. Knowing the substance in the form of sthiti in the mind of another, without the help of the senses, within the limits, is Manahparyayajnana. It has two types: Rijumati and Vipulmati. 48.4. Chaturthashukladhyana- Gyupratkriya niti.
63.3498
Karanya- 1.  Bandhakarana, 2.
Apuurvakarana, 3.  Anivrittikarana, in which the results of the same-time and different-time beings are both similar and dissimilar, they are called Adhakarana. In which the results of the same-time beings are both similar and dissimilar, and the results of different-time beings are only dissimilar, they are called Apuurvakarana. And where the results of the same-time beings are only similar, and the results of different-time beings are dissimilar, they are called Anivrittikarana.
54.225

Page #675:
---------------------------
## Fourth Knowledge - Pranvikshiki, Tribi, Varta, and Dandniti

These four knowledges, with Dandniti being the fourth.

5115 **Chaturmukha-Grihastha** - A puja performed by a householder with four faces. 73158 **Chatustrishdati-Shesh** - Thirty-four ati-shaya (superlative qualities). Ten of these are related to birth, ten to Kevala Jnana (omniscience), and fourteen are related to the Tirthankaras. Thus, there are thirty-four ati-shaya in total. 51.231 **Chatushtaya-Vrithi** - Four types of wealth management: earning, protecting, increasing, and spending. 517 **Chaturmend-Prayogya** - Four types of attainments: Kalalabdhi (attainment of time), Prayogyalabdhi (attainment of the desired object), Kshayopa-shamalabdhi (attainment of the cessation of karma), and Deshanalabdhi (attainment of preaching). When Karanabdhi (attainment of the cause) is added, there are five attainments. 621322 **Chandrayan** - A fast where the intake of food is increased or decreased according to the waxing and waning phases of the moon. 
63019 **Charantva** - The state of a monk who has attained the knowledge of the path and is guided by the teachings of the Tirthankaras. 48582
[Ch] **Chhasthya** - The period after a Tirthankara takes diksha (initiation) until he attains Kevala Jnana. This period is called Chhasthya-kal. During this time, the Tirthankara spends his time in meditation and contemplation. 
48042
**Paribhashik Shabdakosh** - A glossary of technical terms. **Jinamukti-Ahankti** - A feeling of self-importance. 
631327 **Jivadik** - Seven substances: Jiva (living beings), Ajiv (non-living beings), Bandha (bondage), Sambara (accumulation of karma), Nirjara (destruction of karma), and Moksha (liberation). Alternatively, the seven substances can be defined as: Jiva, Pudgal (matter), Dharma (merit), Adharma (demerit), Akash (space), and Kal (time). 54॥275
[T] **Tapas** - A state of austerity. 631324 **Turiyacharitra** - A subtle and refined type of conduct. This conduct is found in the tenth Gunasthan (stage of spiritual development) when the burning desire for worldly pleasures is very weak. 54॥225 **Surya Gunasthan** - The fourth Gunasthan, characterized by unwavering right faith. 5477 **Turyadhyan** - The fourth type of Shukla Dhyan (meditation), called Uparat Kriya Nivriti. This meditation occurs in the fourteenth Gunasthan. 
48.52 **Tirth** - A Tirth begins with the first sermon of a Tirthankara and ends with the completion of the Tirthankara's first sermon. 
61656 **Sthag** - A state of stillness. 633323 **Tray** - Three days of continuous rainfall. 
58.27 **Tritayatnu** - Three bodies: Audarik (physical), Taijas (subtle), and Karman (karmic). 61155 **Tribhedanivang** - Dispassion towards the three: Samsara (cycle of birth and death), Sharira (body), and Bhoga (enjoyment). 
[ ] **Dashdharma** - Ten virtues: 1. Uttam Sama (highest equanimity), 2. Madar (humility), 3. Bab (non-attachment), 4. Shauch (purity), 5. Satya (truthfulness), 6. Samyam (self-control), 7. Tapas (austerity), 8. Tyag (renunciation), 9. Akinchannya (non-possession), and 10. Brahmacharya (celibacy). 
**Dashmogh** - Ten types of worldly possessions: 1. Bhavana (feelings), 2. Bhojan (food), 3. Shayya (bed), 4. Sena (army), 5. Yaan (vehicle), 6. Aasan (seat), 7. Nidhi (treasure), 8. Ratna (jewel), 9. Nagar (city), and 10. Notay (money). 
6679 **Dandatik** - Four types of Kevali (omniscient) beings based on their Ayukarma (life-span karma): Dand, Kapat, Pratar, and Lokpuran. Those Kevalis whose Ayukarma is in the state of "Bodi" (complete destruction) and the remaining three types of karma are in the state of "Adhigati" (partial destruction) are called Dand. Those whose Ayukarma is in the state of "Bodi" and the remaining three types of karma are in the state of "Adhigati" are called Kapat. Those whose Ayukarma is in the state of "Bodi" and the remaining three types of karma are in the state of "Adhigati" are called Pratar. Those whose Ayukarma is in the state of "Bodi" and the remaining three types of karma are in the state of "Adhigati" are called Lokpuran. 
48.52 **Darshan Vishuddhi** - A state of purity of perception, characterized by the ability to perceive the true nature of things. 
631312 **Digvijnana** - Divine knowledge of the directions. 
48.51 **Dikshanvaya Kriya** - A detailed description of this can be found in the second part of the Mahapurana. 63302 **Deshavadhi** - A type of Avadhi Jnana (clairvoyance) that allows one to perceive the boundaries of objects, including their substance, location, time, and nature, without the help of the senses. There are three types of Avadhi Jnana: 1. Deshavadhi, 2. Paramavadhi, and 3. Sarvavadhi. Deshavadhi can be attained in all four gatis (types of existence), while the other two types are only attained by monks in the human gati. 482 
**Dehatray** - Three bodies: Audarik (physical), Samir (subtle), and Karman (karmic). 48.52 **Havin-shati Parisha** - Twenty types of suffering: 1. Kshusha (hunger), 2. Trusha (thirst), 3. Sheet (cold

Page #676:
---------------------------
648
1. Arati 2. Stri 3. Charya 4. Nishadya 5. Shayya 6. Makrosh 7. Bagh 8. Yajya 9. Alaabh 10. Rog 11. Trunsparsh 12. Mal 13. Satkar Puraskar 14. Prajna 15. Agyan Aur 16. Adashan These are the twenty-two Parishhahs. 62.191 During the time of the twelve Sama-Tirthankaras, there are twelve chambers surrounding the Gandhakutis. Devas, Devis and humans sit in them. In one chamber, Tiryanch also sit. These twelve chambers are called twelve Sabhas. 48049 The second Shukla Dhyan - Ekattva Vitak is a Shukla Dhyan. This is the twelfth Gunasyanam.
Uttarapurana 9. Eshan - Anna Jal Shuddhi are called punya. These are essential for feeding the Munis. 541218 Nandi-shwari Puja - Ashtahnik Puja, this puja is performed in the last eight days of Kartik, Falgun and Ashadh. 631258 Namno'nsya - The last of the 93 types of Namkarma is Tirthankara Namkarma. 48.12 Nikshep - Praman and Nay's Anusar, the prevalent Lok-Vyavahar is called Nikshep. 62.28 Nidhi - Chakravarti is the owner of the following nine Nidhis: 1. Kal, 2. Mahakal, 3. Pandu, 4. Manav, 5. Shankh, 6. Naisarp, 7. Padm, 8. Pingal and 9. Nana Ratna 61995 Nirvichkititsa - One of the Angas of Samyagdarshan. 63.315-316 Ni Kankshit Ang - Darshan-Vishuddhi is one form of Darshan-Vishuddhi. 63.314 Nishankit Ang - Darshan-Vishuddhi is one form of Darshan-Vishuddhi. 633313 Nishkranti Kalyanak - Doksha Kalyanak, a special festival created by Devas when Tirthankaras take up Tapas. 48:37
[P] Panchanamaskar - Namo-kar Mantra
70.137 Panchvidh Mithyatva - 1. Agyan 2. Sanshay, 3. Ekant, 4. Vip. Rit and 5. Vinayap are the five types of Mithyatva. 62.297 Panchvimshati Dustarav - The 25 elements of Prakriti etc. accepted in Sankhya Dharma. 74.72
Panchasadbhat - 1. Ahimsa, 2. Saty, 3. Achaury, 4. Brahmacharya and 5. Aparigraha. 101.119 Panchasuna - 1. Kutna, 2. Pisna, 3. Buharna, 4. Pani Bharna and 5. Chulha Jalana. 63.374. Panchprakar Sansar - 1. Dravy, 2. Kshetra, 3. Kal, 4. Bhav and 5. Bhav are the five changes. For their nature, the 'Sansarinon Muktascha' Sutra of Sarvarth Siddhi should be seen.
67.8 Paramesthi - Those who reside in the Parampad - 1. Arhant, 2. Siddha, 3. Acharya, 4. Upadhyay and 5. Sarvasadhu, these five are called Paramestho. 48613 Paravagadh - One of the ten types of Samyagdarshan. This is described by Gunabhadracharya in his Atmanushasan in the 'Agyamarg-Samudbhav' etc. shloka. 54.229 Paschasth - A type of corrupt Muni. 76.192 Purva - Multiplying eighty-four lakhs by eighty-four lakhs, the result is called Purvang. Eighty-four lakh Purvangs make one Purva. 48.28 Purvadharin - Muni who knows the eleven Angas and nineteen Purvas. 48.43 Prakriti - The types and subtypes of Karmas.
48.52 Prabhavana - One of the Angas of Samyagdarshan. 633320 Prajnapti etc. Vidya - 1. Prajnapti, 2. Kamrupini, 3. Agni,
[D] Dhanush - A Dhanush is four hands long. 48028
Nay - Knowledge that accepts one Dharma out of the contradictory eternal and non-eternal Dharmas of the Padarth, due to Vivaksha. 62.28 Navkevalalabdhi - 1. Devalgyan
2. Kevaldarshan 3. Kshayik Samyaktva 4. Kshayik Charitra 5. Kshayik Dan 6. Labh 7. Bhog 8. Upbhog and 9. Veerya are the nine Kevalalabdhis. 616101 Navpunya - 1. Pratigrahan-Padgahana 2. Uchchasthan Dena 3. Pad-Prakshalan 4. Archan 5. Namaskar 6. Manahshuddhi 7. Vachanshuddi 8. Kayashuddhi and

Page #677:
---------------------------
1. Stambini 4. Udakastambini 5. Vishva Pravaishini 6. Apratighat Gamini 7. Bakashagamini 8. Utpadini 9. Vashikarani 10. Ashini 11. Mananiya Prasthapini 12. Promohini 13. Praharani 14. Sankramani 15. Awartani 16. Sangrahini 17. Bhanjani 18. Vipatini 19. Pravartki 20. Promodini 21. Prahapni 22. Prabhavati 23. Pralapaani 24. Niksheni 25. Sharvari 26. Chandali 27. Matangi 28. Gauri 29. Shadangika 30. Shrimantkanya 31. Ratasankula 32. Kubhandi 33. Viral Vegika 34. Rohini Manovega 36. Mahavega 37. Chandavega 38. Chapalavega 39. Laghukari 40. Parnaladhu 41. Vegavati 42. Sheetdada 43. 35. Ushnadada 44. Vaitali 45. Mahajvala 46. Sarvavidya Chhedini 47. Yuddhavirya 48. Bandhamochini 49. Praharavrani 50. Bhramary 51. Abhogini etc. 621391-400 Pratima Yoga-Kayotsarga Mudra
Standing and meditating 48153 Evidence-substance of mutual opposition, eternal, non-eternal, etc. all the doctrines. The knowledge that accepts 62.28 Prajapati-marriage, a kind of marriage in which the groom and bride are married with the consent of parents, etc. 70.115 Pratihariyastaka-Eight Pratihariya 1. Ashoka tree 2. Throne 3. Chatratraya 4. Bhamandala
82
Paribhashik, Dictionary 5. Divine sound 6. Flower rain 7. Sixty-four Chamar and 8. Dundubhi plays these eight Pratihariya are of Tirthankara Arhant. The tree under which the Lord attains omniscience is called Ashoka tree in Samavasaran 54.231 Prayopgamana-Devotee rejection, Prayopgamana and Inginimaran. One of these three kinds of renunciation. In which renunciation death, the devotee himself makes his body walk, not by another, it is called Prayopgamana 621410
1 [V] Balabhadra's four runs-1. Ratna mala 2. Dideepyamaan hal
3. Musal and 4. Gada 62.149 Bashal Bhakti-Bahushruta Bhakti• A feeling 633327 Batira Dvishad Bhed Tap-Bahya
and Babhyantar's difference from the difference of twelve kinds of penance-1. Anashan 2. Avmodarya 3. Vrittiparisankhyan 4. Rasa parityaag 5. Vivikt Shayasan and 6. Kayaklesh these six are external penance. And 1. Prayashchitta 2. Vinaya 3. Vaiyaavrutya 4. Swadhyay 5. Vyutsarga and 6. Dhyan these six are internal penance 621156 Pijasamubhav-Samyagdarshan's kind 74.439, 444,
He is called Bhavy 59.214 Mavana-Tirthankara's name karma binding sixteen feelings-1. Darshan Vishuddhi 2. Vinaya Sampannata 3. Sheel. Vrateshvanatichar 4. Abhikṣaṇ Jñānōpayōga 5. Sanvega 6 Shaktitastyaga 7. Shaktitastap 8. Sadhu Samadhi 9. Vaiyaavrutyakaran 10. Bahkti 11. Pracharyabhakti 12. Bahushruta Bhakti 13. Pravachanabhakti 14. Bavasyaka Parihani 15. Marg Prabhavana and 16. Pravachan Vatsalya 48.12
[M] Mahamah-A special worship 75.477 Manasaahar-As many oceans as there are for the gods, after thousands of years they have a desire for the outside. As soon as the desire arises, nectar falls into the throat and their hunger is satisfied. This is called Manasaahar 61.11 Magpramavana-A feeling
636329 Margsamunav-Samyagdarshan's kind
Bhed 74.439,442 Mithyatvadi Panchak-Karmabandhak Nimnankis five reasons are-1. Mithyatva 2. Bavirati 3. Pramad 4. Kashaya and 5. Yoga 541151 Muktavaaki-A name of a fast. 71.408
[Y] Yoga-The movement of the regions of the soul-hasan-movement is called Yoga
Bhavy-Whose Samyagdarshan, Samyaggyan and Samyakcharitra

Page #678:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**650**
**Uttarapurana**

It is said. In brief, there are three divisions of this: body, speech, and mind. In the thirteenth gunasthan, after the destruction of manoyog and vachanayog, only kayayog remains in a subtle state. From this, the third shukladhyan, called sukshmakriya-pratipat, arises. Finally, even this subtle kayayog is destroyed. 48052

**[7]** **Ratnachatushtya:** 1. Ratnamala, 2. Gada, 3. Seer-Hal, and 4. Musal. These were the four gems of Balabhadra. 71.125 **Ratnavali:** A fast. 
**Rakhawat:** A worship performed by the householder. 73158

**[L]** **Lakshan:** There are 108 auspicious lakshanas in the body of the Lord, and 900 vyajan like masurika etc. 5152
**Vipreeta Mithyatva:** To consider the jnan, shep, and jnayaka tattvas as opposite to reality. 621301 **Vistaraaj:** A division of samyagdarshan. 74440,446 **Yavrysya Kriya:** A bhavana. 631326

**[S]** **Shaktritaya:** 1. Utsah Shakti, 2. Mantra Shakti, and 3. Bhutva Shakti. 4816 **Sheelavatan Atichar:** A bhavana. 633322 **Shuklaleshya:** The inclination of yogas towards the arising of the body with shuklaleshya is called leshya. There are six types of this: 1. Krishna, 2. Neel, 3. Kapoot, 4. Poot, 5. Pap, and 6. Shukla. There are two types of this: dravyaleshya and bhavaleshya. 5117 **Shukladhyan:** The dhyan that occurs in the extreme dullness of moha or the absence of moha is called shukladhyan. There are four types of this: 1. Prithakya Vitarkavichar, 2. Ekatva Ditark, 3. Sukshmakriya Pratipati, and 4. Vyuparat Kriya Nivati. 54||226

**[ ]** **Shatbhama:** 1. Pratyaksha, 2. Anuman, 3. Shabd, 4. Upaman, 5. Arthapatti, and 6. Abhav. These are the six pramanas. 74514 **Padavashyak:** 1. Samata, 2. Vandana, 3. Stuti, 4. Pratikraman, 5. Dhyay, and 6. Kayosarg. These are called the six padavashyak. 
**Shashtopavas:** A fast for two days. 48.39 **Paigunya:** 1. Sandhi, 2. Vigrah, 3. Yaan, 4. Aasan, 5. Desho Bhaav, and 6. Samashray - taking shelter of a great king. These are the six gunas. 5015. **Shodashavapna:** The sixteen dreams that the mother of a Tirthankara sees before he is born in her womb: 1. Airawat elephant, 2. White bull, 3. Lion, 4. Lakshmi's abhishek, 5. Two garlands, 6. Surya Mandal, 7. Chandra Mandal, 8. A pair of beautiful fish, 9. A pair of golden kalash, 10. A pond adorned with lotuses, 11. A roaring sea, 12. A throne, 13. A beautiful divine aircraft, 14. A Nagaendra bhavan, 15. A pile of gems, and 16. A divine fire. 49.22

**[S]** **Sama:** The rain of mevas that reveal the matap-dhoop in intervals for sixty days is called samavrusti. 58.27 **Samadhi:** A bhavana. 631325 **Samuccchinn Kriya Pati:** The fourth shukladhyan. This dhyan occurs in the fourteenth gunasthan. 52067 **Sankshep:** A division of samyagdarshan. 741440,445 **Saptparamasthan:** 1. Sajjatitva, 2. Sadgrihasthtva, 3. Parivaajya, 4. Surendrata, 5. Samrajya, 6. Paramarhanta, and 7. Paramanirman. 633257 **Saptprakriti:** 1. Swami, 2. Amatya, 3. Janasthan, 4. Kosh, 5. Dar-sena, 6. Means of protection, and 7. Mitravarg. 68.72

**Vargtritab:** The group of three purusharthas: dharma, artha, and kama is called trivarg or vargtritaya. Moksha purushartha is called apavarg because it is separate from the aforementioned trivarg. 5118 **Vatsalya:** A division of samyagdarshan. 63.320 **Vatsalya:** A bhavana. 631330 **Vinay Sampamta:** A bhavana. 631321 **Vinay Mithyatva:** To consider all gods as equal and all things as means of liberation is vinay mithyatva. 62.302

Page #679:
---------------------------
## Seven Principles (Saptaprakriti) - 1. Mithyatva, 2. Samyamithyatva, 3. Samyaktava, and the four Anantanu bandhi - 1. Krodha, 2. Mana, 3. Maya, and 4. Lobha, are the seven principles. 62.317

## Seven Jewels (Sapta Ratna) - 1. Chakra, 2. Shakti, 3. Gada, 4. Shankha, 5. Dhanush, 6. Danda Chaur, and 7. Nandaka (Khadga) were the seven jewels of Krishna. 71.124

## Sarvatobhadra - A type of fast observed by a monk. 73.28

## Sarvatomanda - A specific type of worship performed by a householder. 73.158

## Sanjwalana - A type of Kshaya charitra that destroys the Yathakyata charitra. 

## Mohka Bhed (Types of Delusion) - There are four types of Kshaya Vedaniya - 1. Ananta, 2. Aparatyakhyanavaran, 3. Pratyakhyanavaran, and 4. Sanjwalana. 62.32

## Paribhashik Shabdakosh Nubanadh (Glossary of Technical Terms) - 1. Samadi - Sama, Dama, and Kshaya are the three types of Samyaktava. 2. Aparatyakhyanavaran - This is a type of Kshaya that destroys the Desha Paripatra. 3. Pratyakhyanavaran - This is a type of Kshaya that destroys the Sakal Charitra. 4. Sanjwalana - This is a type of Kshaya that destroys the Yathakyata Charitra. 486

## Sinha Nijadin - The penance of the monks. 48.18

## Bali Kshaya - A type of Kshaya. 162

## Sanayama Sanayabha - The abandonment of violence leads to Sanayama, while the absence of such abandonment leads to Basanayama. 59.214

## Sukshmadhyan - The third type of Shuklavyan. 48.152

## Sukshmakriyapratipati - This is the complete name of Sukshmadhyan. 48.152

## Sanveg - A feeling or emotion. 63.323

## Sutrasamujaba - A type of doubt in Samyagdarshan. 74.49, 44

## Mithyanva - A type of doubt. 74.49, 44

## Bagam - A type of doubt. 74.49, 44

## Badi - The fluctuating nature of the Tatvas. 62.299

## Stahadad - The state of being in a particular substance. 62.299

## Sanshaya - The state of being in doubt. 62.299

## Sansak - A type of corrupt monk. 51.09

## Syahar - To speak with a particular emphasis. 51.09

Page #680:
---------------------------
## Geographical Gazetteer

**[A]**

* **Ankavati:** A capital city of Videha. 63.124
* **Bhangadesh:** A region near Bhagalpur in the Bihar province. 58.17
* **Achalgram:** A village in the Magadh country. 62.325
* **Achyut:** The sixteenth heaven. 63.3178
* **Bhanjan:** A Vaksaragiri mountain. 63.203
* **Anjanam:** A Vaksaragiri mountain. 63.203
* **Antim:** The Anuttar-Sarvarthasiddhi Vimana. 64.10
* **Aparajit:** An Anuttar Vimana. 69.41
* **Aparajita:** A capital city of Videha. 63.216
* **Amarbhoodar:** The Sumeru mountain. 61.19
* **Amakkanth:** A city. 72.40
* **Bhamritvati:** A country in the southern range of the Vijayadhanka mountain. 72.154
* **Ayodhya:** A capital city of Videha. 63.217
* **Ayodhya:** A city in the Bharat region, east of the Ghataki Khand. 71.6255
* **Ayodhya:** A city in the Gandhiladesh region, located in the Videha area, west of the Ghataki Khand island. 59.4277
* **Ayodhya:** A city in the Airavatakshetra region. 59.282
* **Ayodhya:** A city in the Balka country, related to the Bharat region in the Pataki Mandala. 54.87
* **Ayodhyapur:** A city. 63.16
* **Arja:** A capital city of Videha. 63.216
* **Arindampur:** A city located in the northern range of the Vijayadhanka mountain, in the Gandhiladesh region related to Videha, north of Pushkara. 70.307
* **Arishtanagar:** The first city outside the residence of Lord Shitalnath. 56.46
* **Arishtpur:** A city. 70.307
* **Arishtpuri:** A capital city of Videha. 63.213
* **Arishta:** A capital city of Videha. 63.213
* **Arkprabh:** A Vimana in the Kapishtha heaven. 59.238
* **Alka:** A country in the Bharat region, on the Ghataki Khand island. 54.86
* **Alka:** A city located in the northern range of the Vijayachanki mountain. 62.158
* **Avadhya:** A capital city of Videha. 63.217
* **Avanti:** A country near Ujjain. 71.208
* **Ashok:** A forest. 75.37
* **Ashokpur:** A city in the Videha region, located west of the Ghataki Khand, east of the Meru. 71.1432
* **Ashoka:** A capital city of Videha. 63.216
* **Ashvapur:** A city in the Vijay region. 62.67
* **Ashvapur:** A city in the Videha region, related to the Ambudwip island. 73.132
* **Ashvapuri:** A capital city of Videha. 63.215
* **Sana:** A Batvi. 59.188

**[A]**

* **Adityapad:** A mountain. 68.1519
* **Adityab:** A city in the southern range of the Vijay mountain in the Pushkalavati country, located east of the Meru, east of the Ghataki Khand. 62.361
* **Adimdwip:** The Jambudwip. 49.2
* **Bhanat:** The thirteenth heaven. 70.195
* **Aryakshetra:** The Bharat region is divided into six parts due to the Ganga and Sindhu rivers and the Vijayai mountain. The middle part is called Aryakshetra, while the remaining five are called Mlechchhakhand. The Tirthankaras' Bihar is only in the Aryakhand. 48.51
* **Avarta:** A country in Videha. 63.208
* **Ashivish:** A Vaksaragiri mountain. 63.203

**[I]**

* **Indrapur:** A city. 65.179
* **Ila:** A mountain in the Bharat region. 59.118

**[U]**

* **Unmattajala:** A Vibhang river. 63.206
* **Ulkamukhi:** A place of residence for the Bhils. 70.156

**[U]**

* **Urjayantgiri:** The Girnar mountain. 71.275
* **Urmimalini:** A Vibhang river. 63.207

Page #681:
---------------------------
## Geographical Gazetteer

**[R]** Ṛjukūlā - A river on whose bank Lord Mahavīra attained Kevaljnāna. 74.349
**[E]** Ekašail - A mountain in the Vakšāragiri. 63.202
**[Ai]** Aīrāvat - A lake. 63.199 Aīrāvat - The seventh region of Jambudvīpa. 69.74 Aīrāvatī - A river. 61.1380
**[Au]** Aušadhī - The capital city of Vidēha. 63.1213
**[K]** Kacčh - A country in Vidēha. 63.0208 Kacčh - A region near Kathiawād. 75.11 Kacčhkāvatī - A country in Vidēha. 63.208 Kanakapur - A city in Bharatvarsh. 58.61 Kanakapur - A city in the Uttarashrēnī of the Vijayavant, related to the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvīpa. 63.165 Kanakapram - A city located on the Uttarashrēnī of the Vijayapravt, related to the Mangalāvatī country of Vidēha. 74.1221 Kanakaprabha - A Vimāna in the Sanatkumar Svarga. 67.146 Kapisth - A forest. 75.479 Kalīng - A country in Mārat, near Khandagiri, Udayagiri (Bhuvaneshwar). 70.165 Kākandī - The birthplace of Lord Pushpadanta. 55.123 Kāňcanaguhā - A cave. 59.235 Kāňcanatilaka - A city in the Uttarashrēnī of the Vijayardhaparvat, located in the Kacčh country of the Vidēha Kshetra, related to Jambudvīpa. 63.105 Kāňcanā - A river. 63.1158 Kāňchī - A city in the Kalīng country. 70.127 Kāntapur - A city in Bangladesh. 75.81 Kāmpilyā - A city in the Bharat Kshetra. The birthplace of Lord Vimalānatha. 59.14 Kāmpilyā - A city. 72.198 Kāpišth - The eighth Svarga. 59.237 Kārankat - A city. 6.211 Kālaka - A forest. 59.196 Kālaguhā - A cave in the Vijayadhan. 72.111 Kāshīdesh - A region near Vārānasī. 53.18 Kinnaragīt - A city in the Vijayaī. 63.93 Kinārpur - A city in the Vijayaī. 71.372 Kilkil - A city in the Dakshinashrēnī of the Vijayaī. 68.271 Kiškindhā - A city. 68.467 Kutaj - A forest in the Vindhyāchal. 74.389 Kund - A city in Vidēha. 75.7 Kundapur - A city in Vidēha. The birthplace of Lord Mahavīra. 74.1252 Kundalapur - A city in the Vidarbha country. 71.2341 Kundalā - The capital city of Vidēha. 63.214 Kunal - A country in Bharat. 59.72 Kučhjak - A forest in the Malayadesh. 73.12 Kumudā - A country in Vidēha. 63.1211 Kummākārakata - The city of Kārakata became known as Kummākārakata due to its association with the Jarman̄sabhojī Kummā. 62.212 Kuru - A country. 70.1200 Kurujāngala - A country in Uttar Pradesh, the region around Hastināpur and Meerut. 61.174 Kušārthavishya - A country in Bharat. 70.92 Kusumavatī - A river in the Bharat Kshetra. 59.118 Kūlgrāmapurī - A city. 74.318 Kešarī - A lake. 63.3197 Kailās - A part of the famous Himalayan mountain range, located in the north of Bharatvarsh. 48.139 Kaushala - Avgadesh, whose capital was Saketa-Ayodhya. 48.71 Kaushāmbī - A city in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvīpa, where Lord Padmāprabha was born. 52.018 Kausalā - A city. 71.6342 Kshīrodā - A Vibhanganā river. 63.207 Kshemapur - A city in the Kacčh country of Jambudvīpa. 65.2 Kshemapur - A city in South Bharat. 75.402

Page #682:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**654**
Kshemapura - A city in the Sukkach country, located in the Videha region. 53.2 Kshemapura - A city in the Videha region. 5712
Kshemapuri - A kingdom in a foreign land.
Water 63.213
Capital
Kshema - Videha 63.213
-
[Kha]
Lagnag - Vijayardha mountain
71.376
Khagapura - Name of a city 61.70
Khachrach - Vijayardha mountain 62.241
Langapura - A city 67.141 Videhi - A night dwelling 63.217 Sa-Viveki - Capital
63 293
Di - A forest 7253 Khadir - A forest 180461
-
[Ga]
Ramanavambu - A city in the Uttararthani region of Jambudvipa 6329 Gaganbaslam - A city located in the Uttarashreni of the Pushkalavati country, in the Videha region of Jambudvipa 70.39
Gaganbalam - A city in the Dakshina Shreni, related to the Dim of Jambudvipa 75.301
Ganga - One of the fourteen great rivers 63.195 Ganga - The famous river of India
70.322
Gajavati - A river in the Bharat region 59/119
Basaragiri
Gandhamadana - A 63.204

Uttara Puranam
Gandhamadana Kumadanapa
71.309
Gandhamadana Parvat - A mountain in Videha 70118 Gandhamalini - A country located on the north bank of the Sitoda river in the western Videha region of Jambudvipa
Vibhanga
59.109 Gandhamalini - A
river 63.207
Gandhamalini - A country in Videha 62.212 Gandhavira - A country 63.212.
Gandhara - A country 63204 Gandhavati - A river 701322 Gandhil - A country in the western Videha region of the Ghataki Khandadipa 59.274
Gandhara - A city in the Gandhara country 63.284 Gandharavishay - A country region 
Giritat - A city 67.270 Girinagara - A city in the Surashtr country 71.270 Gulma Setpura - A city where the first Tirthankara, Parshvanatha, attained liberation 73.112 Godha - A forest
701241 Govardhana - A mountain near Mathura 70418 Gautam - Indradbhuthi
Ganadhara's
village 74.357 Preshak - There are nine Praveyak Vimanas above the sixteenth Swayambhu. These are one above the other. From the beginning, the first three are called Madhyama Praveyak, the next seven are called Parase, and the last one is called Paramavaiveyak.

The Devas residing in these are called Ahmindra 499 [Cha] Chakraka - Mahendrakasra's Vimana 6278
Chakrapura - A city in the Bharat region
65.176
One
Chakrapura - A city where Bhagwan Barnav attained his first liberation 65.35
Chakrapuri - A kingdom in Videha 63.217
Chakrapura (Chakrapur) - A city 59.239 Chandadega - A river in the Bharat region
59.118
Chandan - A forest 620401 Chandra - A lake 63.199 Chandrapura - A city in the southern part of Vijayak 71.405 Chandrapura - Chandrabhagwan's birthplace, Chandrapuri, located near Varanasi 548161 Mah - A Baksaraviri 63.204
Chandraabha - A city 75.390 Chandrodhayagiri - A mountain
75162
Chamarchachapura - A city 62.229
Champa Nagar - A place known as Nathnagar near Bhagalpur 58.17
Champapura - A forest near Nathnagar, near Bhagalpur city in the Bihar province 70183
Charanyugal - A city in India 67.213 Charano - A part of Sammed Shikhar 69.90

Page #683:
---------------------------
## Geographical Gazetteer

**655**

**Proof Sidka Residence Area**

**Chitrakut-Varanasi** - A garden (681126)
**Chitrakut** - A Vaksaragiri (6||202)
**Chitrapur-Vijayadhanka** - A city (62066)
**Chaitravan-Mithila** - A forest (69.54)
**[Ch]** **Chanpur-Bharat Kshetra** - A city (59.254)
**Anakarapur** - A city (74||242)
**Taptajala** - A Vibhanga river (63.206)
**Talpur** - A city (67.34)
**Tiginch** - A lake (63.197)
**Tilak** - A city in the eastern region of Ghataki Khand (63.168)
**Trikuta** - A Vaksaragiri (630202)
**Nipur-Vijaya** - A city (63.14)
**Trilokottama** - A city on the Vijayachan mountain in the Pushkala-Bati country, related to the Videha region in the east of Jambudvipa (73126)
**Jagatpadagiri** - A mountain (68.468)
**Jatharakashik** - A place where Tapas (ascetics) live (70.323)
**Jambumat** - Jambudvipa (4813)
**Jayant** - A Uttara Vimana (70.59)
**Jayantpur-Bharat Kshetra** - A city (711452)
**Jayanti** - The capital of Videha (631216)
**Jambav** - A city located on the northern range of the Vijayachan mountain, related to the Bharat Kshetra in Jambudvipa (71368)
**Ammiksgram** - A village where Lord Mahavira attained Kevalgyan (744340)
**Jyoti:pram** - A city on the southern range of Vijayachan (620241)
**Jyotirvan** - A forest in Vijayachan (71137)

**[T]** **Tanuvat** - The end of the Lok (world) - Tanuvat, Tabalay. It is 1575 Dhanush thick at the end of the Udhyan Lok. The last 525 Dhanush is...
**Dantpur-Kalingadesh** - A city (7065)
**Dan** - A country - near Vidisha (75.10)
**Dasanpur-Gavati Desh** - A city (71.291)
**Dishagir** - A mountain located in Kapithavan (75479)
**Devakul** - A lake (631198)
**Devdaru Van** - A forest (70.252)
**Devamal** - A Vaksaragiri (630204)
**Devaraman** - A forest (63.186)
**Devadri** - Sumeru mountain (50121)
**Patilka** - A city in Vijayachan (62036)
**Dwaravati-Dwarikapuri** (71027)
**Dwaravati** - A city (58583)

**[Dh]** **Dharnibhusan** - A mountain in Supatisthapur (76.22)
**Dharnatilka** - A city (59.228)
**Dhavaldesh** - A country in Jambudvipa (67256)
**Dhatakikhand** - The second island. This island is four lakh yojanas wide and is shaped like a puri, surrounded by the salt sea (51.2)
**Dhanyapur-Magadh Desh** - A city (76.242)

**[N]** **Nagarshoma** - A city (75.52)
**Nandan** - A city in the Pushkaradvipa-Pudi Bhat Kshetra (63.12)
**Nandan** - The Nandanvan of Meru mountain (71.362)
**Nandan** - Nandanagiri (63.33)
**Nandanpur** - A city where Bimalanab Bhagwan had his first Pahaar (74.422)
**Bhandpur** - A city (63.334)
**Mandpur** - A city on the southern range of Vijayadhanka, related to the Bharat Kshetra in the east of Dhatakikhand (71.254)
**Mandigram** - A village where the people did not give shelter to the prince Rin (74.422)
**Nandigram** - A village (75.105)
**Nandighosh** - A place (75.5)
**Nandyaavart** - A Vimana in the thirteenth heaven (62.41)
**Namastilka** - A mountain (63.336)
**Narakanta** - A great river (63.196)
**Nalin** - A city where Lord Chandraprbha had his first Pahaar (541217)

Page #684:
---------------------------
## Uttara Purana: Place Names and Locations

**Uttara Purana**

**63.202** Nalinkrita - A mountain with a chest-like shape.
**63.211** Nalina - A country in Videha.
**684** Nagamal - A mountain with a chest-like shape.
**63.204** Nabheya Sima - A mountain.
**62.281** Nari - A great river.
**63.3196** Nityalokapur - The second island of the Dhataki Khand.
**71.50** Nishdha - A lake.
**63.198** Nishdha - The third Kulachal of Jambudvipa.
**63.193** Neel - The fourth Kulachal of Jambudvipa.
**63.193** Neelavan - A lake.
**63.3210** Padmavati - A city in Videha.
**63.1214** Padmini Khet - A city.
**62.191** Padmini Khet - A city in the north of Mount Meru in Jambudvipa.
**63.263** Parnakant - A river.
**63.1266** Palashkut - A village in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa.
**71.278** Palashnagar - A city in Palashdvipa.
**72.196** Pallava - A country.
**76.398** Pataliputra - The city of Patna.
**61.140** Pataliputra - A city where the first Bahar of Bhagwan Dharmanayaka Muni took place.
**76.38** Pavapur - Pavapur in Bihar, where Bhagwan Mahavira attained Moksha.
**63.98**  Pundarik - A lake.
**62.86** Pundarikin - A city in the Pushkalavati country of Videha.
**71.1429** Punnagpur - A city in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa.
**74.142** Pushpakarandak - A Kusumodyan in Podanpur.
**54.18** Pushkardvipa - The third island of Madhyaloka. The Manushottar mountain, shaped like a Chudi, is located in the middle of this island. Humans can travel up to this point.
**59.4230** Pushkarpur - A city.
**63.3142** Pushkalavati - A country in Videha of Jambudvipa.
**71.1425** Pushkalavati - A city in Gandharadesh.
**75.1469** Pushpak - A forest in Rajpur.
**70.1253** Pushparamya - A pond adorned with lotuses.
**59.241** Prithivitalak - A city.
**48.58** Prithivinagar - A city in the Vatskavati country of the Videha region.
**59.209** Podan - The capital of the Surmyadesh.
**63.214** Prabhakari - A city in the Vatskavati country.
**78.9** Pratyantanagar - A city.
**48.58** Pragvideha - The eastern Videha region.
**76.220** Priyankar - A forest located on the Dharnibhusan mountain.
**70.191** Priyangkhand - A forest in Varanasi.
**59.274** Priyangkhand - A forest.
**59.17** Preetikar - A forest.
**59.227** Preeti-nkar - The upper plane of the Urdhvagrameyak.
**75.315** Preetivadhan - A garden in Rajpur.

**[F]** Phenamalini - A river of the Vibhang.
**63.207**

**[B]** Bag - Bengal.
**69.18** Balmadar - A plane in the Mahendra heaven.
**76.199** Brahmalok - The fifth heaven.
**48.34**

**[B]** Bhalidesh - A country.
**48.1127** Bhalgi - A country of horses.
**73.120**

**Nrilok** - Two and a half islands: Jambudvipa, Lavanasamudra, Dhataki Khand island, Kalodadhi sea, and Pushkarardhdvipa. All of these together are called Nrilok - the human world. Humans reside in these.
**61.112**

**[P]** Pakprama - The second hell.
**59.238** Pankavati - A river of the Vibhang.
**63.197** Padam - A lake.
**73.31** Padam - A country in the western Videha of Jambudvipa.
**63.202** Padmakut - A mountain with a chest-like shape.
**59.148** Padmakhandpur - A country in India.
**63.210** Padma - A country in Videha.

Page #685:
---------------------------
## Geographical Dictionary

**Madrapur** - A country in Malwa, also known as Bhaddanpur or Bhelsa (Vidisha). 56.24
**Madril** - A city in the Mangalavati country. 70.183
**Madil** - A city. 70.385
**Madrilpur** - A city in the Malay country. 56.164
**Madvilpur** - The birthplace of Shitalnath Bhagwan. 71.1303
**Bharat** - The first region of Jambudvipa.
**Bhaskar** - A celestial plane in the Maha Shukra heaven. 59.226
**Meemkut** - A mountain. 75.47
**Bhimaranya** - A terrifying forest near Manoharpur. 59.116
**Bhujangshailpuri** - The city of the Kichakas. 72.215
**Bhutaraman** - A forest. 63.186
**Bhutilka** - A city. 76.252
**Mogpur** - A city in the Hari Varsha country of Bharat. 70.74
**Mogpur** - A city. 67.63
**Mogvardhan** - A city in the Bharat region. 58.091
**Magadh** - A part of present-day Bihar province, whose capital was Rajagriha. 57.70
**Mangal** - A country in the Bharat region of Jambudvipa. 71.1278
**Mangalavati** - A country in the Videha region. 50.2
**Manasha** - A capital of Videha. 63.213
**Mattajala** - A river that divides. 63.206
**Mathura** - A famous city in Uttar Pradesh. 57.179
**Madhuk** - A forest in the city of Pundarikin. 62.86
**Madhuk** - A forest in the city of Pundarikin in Videha. 74.15
**Manujoday** - A mountain in Ratnadvipa. 75.303
**Manorama** - A large garden. 66.248
**Manohar** - A garden in Kaushambi. 69.4
**Manohar** - A forest. 67.66
**Manohargiri** - A mountain in the Vatsakavani country of the Videha region. 58.6
**Manoharpur** - A city. 59.116
**Manoharvan** - A forest. 59.204
**Mandar** - The Meru mountain. 51.02
**Mandarpur** - A city on the Vijayardha mountain. 66.3109
**Mandarshail** - The Mandargiri region (Bihar province). 58.052
**Mandar** - A city related to the southern range of Vijayardha. 63.177
**Mandir** - A city in Bharat. 74.77
**Mandirgram** - A village. 71.326
**Marudgari** - The Meru mountain. 71.421
**Malay** - The Malwa country. 56.23
**Malay** - A country. 71.293
**Mahakachha** - A country in Videha. 63.208
**Mahagandhavati River** - A river that originates from the Gandhamadana mountain. 71.309
**Mahanagar** - A city where Bhagwan Vasupujya had his first outing. 58.40
**Mahanagar** - A city in the Ramyakavati country of the Videha region, related to the Dhatkikhandadvipa. 59.2
**Mahapadma** - A lake. 63.197
**Mahapadma** - A country in Videha. 63.1210
**Mahapuundarik** - A lake. 63.198
**Mahapur** - A city in Bharat. 58.58
**Mahapur** - The capital of Videha. 63.1215
**Maharatnapur** - A city in Vijaya. 62.68
**Mahavatasa** - A country in Videha. 63.1209
**Mahavapra** - A country in Videha. 63.211
**Mahashukra** - The tenth heaven. 59.226
**Mahahimalavan** - The second Kulachal of Jambudvipa. 63.193
**Mahipur** - A city in the Gandhar country. 75.13
**Mahipalpur** - The name of a city. 61.11
**Manushottar** - A large circular mountain located in the middle of the Pushkar Vardvipa. 70.292
**Malyavan** - A lake. 63.199
**Malyavan** - A mountain in the Vaksaragiri. 63.204
**Mahendra** - The fourth heaven. 61.165
**Mithila** - A city. 66.20
**Munisagar** - A mountain. 63.94
**Mrigavati** - A country. 71.291
**Meghkut** - A city in the Amritavati country, located on the southern range of Vijayardha. 72.154
**Medhpur** - A city on the southern range of the Vijayardha mountain, related to the Purvabharat region of the Dhatkikhandadvipa. 71.3252
**Medhpur** - A city in Vijaya. 62.66
**Yupakesarini** - A river. 59.216

Page #686:
---------------------------
658
Uttarapurana
A vein 14 rajus high and 1 raju wide, lying between the Lokanali and the Lokas. It is called the Tras Nadi or the Lok Nadi. Generally, the Tras beings reside in this Tras Nadi. 48.16
[R] Rakta - a great river 63.196 Raktoda - a great river 63.196 Ratnamala - a river near Mandaragiri 58/51 Ratnadweep - a major place for gem trade in India 59.148 Ratnapura - a city in India 59.88 Ratnapura - a city in Malayadesh 67.90 Ratnapura - a village in Magadhadesh 62.328 Ratnapura - a city in Bharatavarsha where Lord Dharmanath was born 61113 Ratnapura - a city in the Airavatakshetra of Jambudweep 633157 Ratnapura - a city in the Vatsakavati country of the Pushkarardha Dwip 5802 Ratnapura - a city 633127 Ratnasanchay - a city in the Madlavati country of the Videhaksetra 503 Ratnasajhaya - the capital of Pak Raj of Videha 63.215 Sthanupura - a city named Rathanupura Chakravan 62.96 Rathanupurachakraval - a city in the southern range of Vijayadhaki 62.25 Rathavart - a mountain 74/157 Rathavartadri - a mountain 62.126 Ramaniya - a city situated on the Manujoday mountain in Ratnadweep 75.303 Ramaniya - a country of Videha 633210 Ramyak - the fifth region of Jambudweep 633191 Ramyakavati - a country of the Videha region related to the Ghatakikhand Dwip 59.2 Ramyakavati - a country of Videha 631210 Ramya - a country of Videha 63.210 Ravipriya - a Vimana of the Sahmar heaven 59.218 Rajagriha - a famous city in the Bihar province, where the king resided 61156 Rajpura - the capital of Hemaangad country 75188 Kami - the fifth Kulachal of Jambudweep 63.193 Ruchak - the Vimana of Kapistha heaven 59/238 Rupyakula - a great river 63.196 Rupyasail - Vijayapर्वत 67.176 Roruk - a city in Kachchhdesh 75.11 Rohit - a great river 63.195 Rohitasy - a great river 63.195 Raivatkagiri - Girinar mountain 71.179
[L] Lakshmi - a goddess 63.200 Lakshmigram - a village in the Magadha country related to the Bharatakshetra of Jambudweep 71.317. Laknagar - the capital of Ravana 68.298 Lakapura - Lanka 689 Lagala - a country of Videha 63.208 Kantav - Santa heaven 59.280
Bakapura - the place of creation of the Prashasti Uttarapurana 34 Bangavishaya - Bengal province 66.20 Vats - a country of the Videha region 52.2 Vassa - a country related to the Videha region of the Pukardhadweep 5602 Vats - a country related to the eastern Videha region of Jambudweep 6412 Valsakavati - a country of the Videha region 48058 Valsakavati - a country of Videha 62.75 Vatsadesh - a country of the Bharatakshetra of Jambudweep 70.63. Vatsa - a country of Videha 631209 Vatsa - a city of Magadha country 7571 Vangiri - a mountain 67.115 Vanavasa - a country in South India according to the Prashasti 34 Vprakavati - a country of Videha 63211 Vpra - a country of Videha 63.211 Varahadri - a mountain of Vijay 72.108. Vardhaman - the name of the Pak city where the first Thahar of Lord Padma Prabh in his Muni state took place 52.53

Page #687:
---------------------------
Vasvokasaar - A city
63.118 Vaswalaya - A city of Vijaya 631251 Vaswalaya - A city of India
70.76 Varanasi - A famous city of Bharatavarsha. It is also called Banaras 53119 Vikhyat - Pak Sarovar
63.199 Vijay - Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant, Aparajit Chaur Sarvarth Siddhi, one of the five Anuttar Vimanas
48.13 Vijay - A city of Pushkalavati country
71.363 Vijaypur - A city 714440 Vijaypur - A city where Vasudev resided under the Ashoka tree 70.249 Vijaypuri - A city of Videha
63.215 Vijaya - A capital of Videha
63.216 Vijayavati - A Vaksaragiri
63.203 Vidarbha - A country 71.341 Videha - The fourth region of Jambudvipa
63.191 - Vineeta - Ayodhya city 61 - 104 Vineeta - Ayodhya city of Jambudvipa 7147 Vindhyapur - A city of Malaya country
58163 Vindhyapur - A city of Gandhar country in the Airavatakshetra 63399 Vindhyadi - A famous mountain of India 741389
Geographical Dictionary Vipuladi - Vipulachal, Rajagrihi -
Famous hill. Moksha place of Jivandhar Swami 75.687 Vimalkantar - A mountain
59.188 Vimalpram - A Vimana of Saudharma heaven 620376 Viraja - A capital of Videha
63.216 Virat - A city 720216 Vishala - Ujjain 71208 Vidyutkant - A city of the southern range of Vijayadhanka 681275 Vidyutpram - A Vaksaragiri
63.205 Vidyutpram - A Sarovar 63.199 Vitashoka - A city of Gandhamalini country 59.109 Vitashoka - A city of Videha in Pushkarvardeep 62 - 364 Vitashokpur - A city of Pushkalavati country related to Videha in the east of Jambudvipa 71.360 Vitashokpur - A city 71.439 Vitashoka - A city 6266 Vitashoka - A capital of Videha 631216 Virpur - A city near Mithila
69.56 Vridha - A village of Magadh country
76.152 Vridhagram - A village of Kaushal country 59.207 Vegavato - A river 73122 Baijayant - Vijay, Vaijayant, Jayant Aparajit and Sarvarth Siddhi, one of the five Anuttar Vimanas 5115 Baijayant - A name of a Gopura
68.651 . Baijayanti - A capital of Videha
633216
659 Baidury - A Vimana of Mahashukra heaven 59.226 Baimarparvat - A mountain 63.140 Vaishali - A city of Sindh country
753 Vaishravanakut - A Vaksaragiri 63.202
[Sh] Shanga - A city of Bharatakshetra in Jambudvipa 621494 Shankashail - A mountain of Airavat in Dhatakikhand Dvipa 631247 Shankha - A country of Videha
63.211 Shatruay - A mountain 72.262 Sharkaraprama - The second earth 59.
280 Shatakar - A Vimana of Panat heaven 70.196 Saligram - A village of India
71.390 Salmaligram - A village of Magadh country
711446 Shikharnal - A name of a forest
62.243 Shikhari - The sixth Kulachal of Jambudvipa 63.193 Shikhibudhar - A mountain near Dhanyapur
76.322 Shivmandir - A city of the southern range of Vijayadhanka 63.116 Shivmandirnagar - A city where King Damitar lived 621433 Shivankar - A city of Vijayadhanka mountain 75.164 Shitoada - A Vibhang river 631
207 Shukrampur - A city of the northern range of Vijay mountain in Sukchha country in Videha region of Jambudvipa 63191

Page #688:
---------------------------
## 660
Uttarapurana
[S] Sanatkumar Kalpa - Third Heaven

**Shuma-Videha** - A capital city
**63.215 Shailpur** - A city where Lord Pushpadanta had his first outing.
**5548 Shauryapur** - A city in Kusharth country.
**70.93 Shraddhavan** - A Vaksaragiri.
**63.203 Shravasti** - A city in Bharat Kshetra, where Lord Sambhavnath was born. It is known as Sehdamehd in the Gonda district of Uttar Pradesh.
**4914 Shravasti** - A city in Kunal country of Bharat.
**59.72 Srinaganag** - A mountain named Srinag.
**66.13 Srinillaya** - A Vimana in the Paudharma heaven.
**62365 Shri Pur** - A city in Sugandhi country of Videha Kshetra, related to Pushkarvardvipa.
**5425 Shri Pur** - A city.
**633333 Shri Pur** - A city in Sukkach country, located in the Ghor region east of Mount Meru, related to Jambudvipa.
**66168 Shri Pur** - A city in Airavat Kshetra.
**6974 Shri Pram** - A mountain.
**5481 Shri Pram** - A Vimana in the first heaven.
**54182 Shwetvan** - A forest, where Lord Mallinath took Diksha.
**66.47 Shwetvahan** - A Seth of Hastinapur.
**711260 Shwetvika** - A city.
**712283 Sammand** - The famous mountain named Sammed Shikhar in Bharatvarsha. It is known as Paras Parvat in the Hazaribagh district of Bihar. Twenty Tirthankaras and countless monks attained Moksha from here, making it the most famous pilgrimage site.
**48151 Sarita** - A country in Videha.
**63.211 Saryavart** - A burrow in the Ratnaprabha earth.
**72131 Sarvarmaniya** - A city.
**76.184 Sarvatuk** - A forest where Lord Chandraprma took Diksha.
**54.216 Sarvatuk** - A forest in Sanknagar.
**68.307 Sarvashail** - A mountain.
**621496 Sartharsiddhi** - One of the five Anuttar Vimana.
**61112 Sahasraabhavan** - A Pag in Bhunagadh.
**116169 Sahasrar** - The twelfth heaven.
**61168 Sahetuk** - A forest where Lord Kunthunath took Diksha.
**64.38 Sahetukvan** - The forest in Ayodhya where Lord Ajitnath took Diksha.
**48.38 Sambhutaraman** - A forest.
**62.379 Saketa** - A city in Kaushal country - Ayodhya.
**6157 Sakantpur** - A city.
**59.258 Satankar** - A Vimana in the sixteenth heaven.
**70.50 Sarasamuccaya** - A country.
**68.3 Sarasaukhya** - A village where the brother-in-law of Khadigsar Bhil lived.
**74401 Siddhakut** - A Kut on Vijayargha Parvat, where there are Akritrim Chaityas.
**6273 Siddhachal** - A mountain.
**63.126 Siddhart** - A forest in Ayodhya.
**68707 Siddhart** - A forest.
**71.417 Siddhartanaga** - A city where Lord Shreyansnath had his first meal.
**57.49 Sindhu** - A great river.
**633195 Sindhu** - A country.
**75.3 Sindhugopur** - A Gopura.
**681653 Singhagir** - A mountain.
**74169 Singhpur** - Singhpuri near Varanasi, which is now known as Sarnath.
**57.17 Singhpur** - A city in Sugandhil country of Videha Kshetra in the west of Jambudvipa.
**705 Singhpuri** - A capital city of Videha.
**631215 Sitasarit** - One of the fourteen great rivers of Jambudvipa, flowing in Videha Kshetra.
**48.3 Simantachal** - A mountain.
**6785 Sukkach** - A country in Videha.
**57.2 Sukoushal** - A country in Jambudvipa.
**71.416 Sukhavaha** - A Vaksaragiri.
**63.203**

Page #689:
---------------------------
Sugandha-Videha is a country.
63.212 Sugandhi-Pushkararvadvipa is a country in the Videha region. 54.10 Sujan is a country. 751420. Sudarshan is a forest. 70.187. Sudarshan-Bam is a Vimana of the Veyaka.
49.9 Supna-Videha is a country.
63.210 Suprakara is a city. 71409 Supratistha is a city in the Magadha country. 76.216 Subhadra is a Vimana of the Madhyama Aveyaka. 73.40 Surakantara is a city in the southern range of Vijaya.
66.114 Suranipaata is a forest. 63.128 Suramalaya is a garden in Rajapura.
75.346 Suramya is a country. 62189 Suradri is the Sumeru mountain. 58.21 Surastra is a country famous by the name Saurashtra in Bharat. 71.27. Surendrakantara is a city in Vijayardha.
62071 Sulasa is a lake. 633198 Suvatsa is a country in Videha. 630209 Suvapra is a country in Videha.
631211 Suvarnakula is a great river.
63.196 Suvarnavati is a river in the Bharat Kshetra. 59.119 Suvarnamapura is a city in the southern range of the Vijaya mountain. 75:36
Geographical Dictionary Suvishala is a Vimana in the Saudharma heaven. 66.105 Susima is a city in the Vatsa country of the Pushkarardha Dvipa. 5602 Susima is a city in the Vatsa country of the Videha region in Jambudvipa. 48.4 Susimanagara is a city in the Vatsa country of the Videha region. 52.3 Sutika is a village in Bharat. 74.74 Surya is a lake. 63.198 Suryaprampura is a city located in the northern range of the Vijaya mountain in the Gandhila country, which is located west of the Sumeru mountain in the western part of the Pushkarardha Dvipa. 70.27 Suryamala is a Vaksaragiri. 63.204 Senaramya is a lake.
75.51. Somakheta is a city, where the first Mahahaar of Bhagavan Suparshvanatha was born. 53143 Saudharma is the first heaven. 62188 Saumanasa is the name of a city.
5172 Saumanasa is a Vimana below the Urdhva Veyaka. 63.141 Saumanasa is a Vaksaragiri.
63.205 Saumyamahibhrit is a mountain in Hastinapura. 70.209 Stalaka is a city in the Vijaya mountain. 68.13 Sthunakara is a city in Bharat.
74.71 Swayamprabha is an island. 71.451
Swastika is a Vimana in the thirteenth heaven. 621411 Swastikavati is a city in the Dhavala country. 671256 Sroto'antavahini is a Vibhanga, a river. 63.207
[h] Haravati is a river in the Bharat Kshetra.
59.118 Harikanta is a great river.
63.195 Harit is a great river. 63.195 Harivarsha is the third region of Jambudvipa, where the Madhyama-Bhogabhumi is located. 71.392 Harivarsha is a country in Bharat.
70.74 Hastishirshpura is a city.
711444 Hastinapura is a city in the Kurujangala country of Bharat. 7051 Hastinapura is a famous city in the Kurubangala country. 66174 Himavan is the first Kunachal of Jambudvipa. 63.193 Hemakacha is a city in the Dasharna country. 75.10 Hemangada is a country in Jambudvipa.
75.188 - ... Hemamapura is a city. 751472 Haimavata is the second region of Jambudvipa, where the Jghanya Bhogabhumi is located. 711445. Hairanyavata is the sixth region of Jambudvipa. 63192 Hridavati is a Vibhanga river.
63.206 Hrida is a Vibhanga river.
63.206 Homant is a mountain. 62.274

Page #690:
---------------------------
[ A ] Agravabodha-Kevalgyan 61055 Adyavipak-Papodya 59.236 Achalesh- Sumeru Parvat 66.34 Adhman-Karjdar 69.6 Adhirajtata-Rajya 68.273 Adhishwar- Bhagwan Neminath 71.193 Anabhijatatva - Adhintva 72.84 Anavam-Shreshtha 66.100 Anavaran-Vastraadi .Avaranse
Rahit 6373 Anashwan- Muni 70.166 Animish-Machhli 51165 Animish-Dev 74.22 Animishaangana-Devangana 54॥ 177 Animishaadhesh Indra 61.19 Anishthit-Apurn 487 Anujighruksha-Anugrah Karneki Ichchha 56.69 Anupadam-Pichhe Hi 63488 Anuyogan-Prashna Puchhna 70.42 Anudhbhav-Chhota 62.265 Anekparaati-Siha 68 326 Antkopama-Yamake Tuly 7119 Antya-Anuttar - Sarvarth Siddhi Vimaan 61.17 Antya-Keshav-Krishna 71.189 Antevasita-Shishytata 66.105 Antevasitva-Shishytata 497 Andhas-Bhojan-58040 Anvaymaaniini-Laka Abhimaan Rakhnevaali 62.342 Apdaan-(Avdaan ) Saahas 72074
Saadharan Shabdakosh Apavrag-Moksh 48.10 Apavart-Akal-Maran 56.33 Apaagbhaag-Paschim Pradesh 4813 Apaachi-Dakshin Dishako Shreni
62.25 Apravichaar - Maithunase Rahit
4817 Abda-Varsh 48.15 Abdamarg-Baakash 72051 Abdasam-Darpanke Samaan 59.1 Abhyarn-Nikatvarti 71.205 Abhyaash-Sameep 70.263 Abhrapadavi-Aakash 54॥63 Abhrita-Meghase Yukt 54.63 Amizaat-Kuleen 54॥133 Amivjraayudham-Vajraayudhake Sammuk 63.49 Amishavapurvakam - Abhishekapurvak
70.213 Amatra-Paatra 761404 Amaradam Kalpvruksh 48062 Amarparibridh-Devonke Swaami-Indra
72.276 Amaradhinath-Indra 7145 Ama-Saath 630243 Amritameeshu-Chandrama 64.21 Amritaanshu-Chandrama 63.447 Amritashan-Dev 6817 Amritashanaadhesh-Devendra 6153 Aya-Punnya 487 Ayut-Dash Hajar Varsh 711389 Ayoday-Punnyoday 63385 Ayodhyesh-Raja Dashrath 67.182 Ara-Pakrake Dand 7011 Aratni-Ek Haath Pramaan 63.338 Arinjay-Shatruonko Jeetnevaala 72.25
Ajit-Surya Ko Jeetnevaala
74135 Archa-Pratima 72155 Arjunottar-Nakul Aur Sahadeva
72.217 Ardhachakri-Naaraayan (Anantveerya)
631 Alakaaki-Kesh Samuh 72.156 Avgam-Gyan 631234 Bhavdisthan-Saatva Narak 61282 Bhavani-Prithvi 52017 Avmati-Tiraskar 74.471 Avaskargrih-Vishthagrih 76.98 Avachya-Ninda 67.107 Avaap-Pararaashtra Chinta 62134 Avivek-Abhed 58188 Ashani-Vajra 70.74 Ashtamikshiti-Moksh 63.108 Ashtami Prithvi-Ishtapraagbaar Naamki Pathviin Prithvi Jisake Uparitan Pradesh R Siddhonka Nivaas Hai 76.271 Ashtami Mahi-Moksh 621170 Ashtapadpram-Suvarnke Samaan Kantivaala 59.24 Ashtapadmay-Swarna Nimit 62 226 Ashtopavaas-Nela-Teen Dinka
Upavaas 71.19 Astaari-Shatru Rahit 51020 Aharpati-Surya 6177 Ahivditivaahini-Gavaahini 62.112 Ahideirivaahini- Garudvaahini, Ek Vidya 71.381 Anshumali-Surya 48 35

Page #691:
---------------------------
## Simple Dictionary
**663**

**[A]**
* **Ajavanjav-Sansar:** The world of the living beings. 51118
* **Aadi-Kalyan-Garbhkalyanak:** The auspiciousness of the womb and the auspiciousness of the beginning. 61017
* **Aadikalpesh-Pratham Swargka Indra-Soudharmendra:** The first Indra of the first heaven, the Indra of the Saudharma heaven. 49.25
* **Adityodgamvela-Suryaodayka Samay:** The time of sunrise. 751490
* **Aadyachakrivad-Pratham Chakravarti Bharatke Samaan:** The first Chakravarti, similar to Bharat. 48176
* **Aadyashreni-Kshapak Shreni:** The first category of destroyers. 63.234
* **Aanandnatak-Bhagavan Ke Janmotsavke Samay Indra Ke Dwara Kiya Janevala Ek Vishisht Nritya:** A special dance performed by Indra at the time of the birth of the Lord. 49.25
* **Aptata-Jnanaavaran, Darshanavaran, Moh, Bour, Antaray In Chaar Ghatiyakarmonke Nash Honepar Apt-Marahant Avस्था Prakat Hoti Hai:** When the four karmas of knowledge-obscuration, perception-obscuration, delusion, attachment, and obstruction are destroyed, the state of Apt-Marahant is revealed. 48.42
* **Abhigamik-Uttam:** Excellent. 50.39
* **Amay-Rog:** Disease. 74.407
* **Amaram-Devon Sambandhi:** Related to the gods. 4870
* **Arnal-Kanji:** Rice gruel. 74.342
* **Araatiya-Paacharya Paramparase Prapt:** Received from the tradition of the Paacharya. 5695
* **Aadratandularopana-Gile Chavalon Par Chadhana, Vivaahke Samay Honevala Ek Neg (Dastoor):** Putting wet rice on the head, a custom (ritual) performed during marriage. 71.151
* **Vaap-Pararastrako Chinta:** Worry about foreign countries. 70.17
* **Ashanekap-Diggaj:** Giant. 68.541
* **Ashushukhani-Bagni:** Fire. 7116
* **Ashwayuj-Dhasoj, Kunwarkaka Mahina:** The month of Ashwayuj, the month of Kunwar. 56.58
* **Daana:** Donation. 1958
* **Mahav-Yuddha:** War. 48154
* **Aaharya-Aabhushan:** Ornament. 72.75

**[I]**
* **In-Surya:** Sun. 62.389
* **Ibya-Vaishya:** Vaishya. 76.37
* **Ee-Stuti:** Praise. 73.165

**[U]**
* **Utkoch-Ghoos:** Bribe. 75.28
* **Utsedh-Shariraki Unchaai:** Height of the body. 4873
* **Udak-Shreshtha:** Best. 51.11
* **Udyan-Ugta Hua:** Rising. 69.20
* **Udgagam-Utpatti:** Origin. 54.23
* **Udgam-Phool:** Flower. 568
* **Upadhi-Parigrah:** Attachment. 66.48
* **Uparat-Mrit:** Dead. 68:273
* **Upshalyam-Nagarke Sameep:** Near the city. 667
* **Upanshu-Ekaant:** Solitude. 72685
* **Upasak-Shravak:** Follower. 76.219
* **Upasakavat-Shravako Vat:** Like a follower. 54.144

**[Oo]**
* **Ujayantachal-Girinar Parvat:** Girinar mountain. 72.190
* **Urdhvavrajya-Urdhvgamana:** Ascending. 71.197

**[E]**
* **Ekpati-Pativrata:** One who is devoted to her husband. 62141
* **Ekmayasva-Ekpatnivrata:** One who is devoted to one wife. 62141
* **Ens-Paap:** Sin. 48.101

**[Ai]**
* **Aikagarik-Por:** Hole. 76.68
* **Ailavil-Kuber:** Kubera. 48.20

**[O]**
* **Aurg-Urag-Sarp Sambandhi:** Related to snakes. 59.37

**[K]**
* **Kanthirvasva-Singhpana:** Lion's roar. 73167
* **Kanthirvaadi-Singhaadi Tiryanch:** Lion etc., among the animals.
* **Kamra-Manohar:** Beautiful. 63.346
* **Karaakhuk-Chhaddunder:** Bat. 71.321
* **Karenu-Hastiini:** Elephant. 73 13
* **Kaladhaut-Swarna:** Gold. 611129
* **Kalindakanya-Yamuna Nadi:** Yamuna river. 70.346
* **Kalp-Swarg:** Heaven. 7079
* **Kalpag-Kalpvriksh:** Wish-fulfilling tree. 59.3
* **Kalyanayogy-Vivaahke Yogya:** Suitable for marriage. 71.144
* **Kalyanavidhipurvak-Vivaahpurvak:** After marriage. 63.117
* **Kalaapi-Mayur:** Peacock. 67.299
* **Kansamaithun-Kanska Sala:** Kansa's brother-in-law. 70.447
* **Kantataavadhi-Saundarya Ki Seema:** Limit of beauty. 62.351
* **Kaamamantra-Kaamashastra:** The science of love. 637

Page #692:
---------------------------
664
Skillful-fortunate
7112 Kevalaavagam-Kevalajnani 48.45 Keshav-Narayan 76 487 Koparunitvigrah-Whose body was turning red with anger. 680 Koshataki phal-Tuma 711275 Kaurav-Kuruvanshi 721227 Kaumumm-Kusumani color red color 7181 Kramukdra m-Muparikay vriksh
631343 Krampankaj-Charan Kamal 58147 Kramaambuj-Charan Kamal
68500 Kravyaad-Meal 75.560 Kroshta-Miyar 7675 Shanti-Aryika 75.33 Kshupvishesh-A bush 70.129 Kshem-Prapt vastu ka raksha 62.35
Audraras-Madhuka ras 76.105 Kshmaj-Vriksh 68.358
[Kh] Khagaadish-Vidhyadharon ke raja 62:81 Si-Vidhyadhari 63187 Kharamipu-Tishnan Kiran, Surya 5422 Khalurika-The place where the practice of wielding weapons is done 756422 Swagata-Coming from the sky
Uttar Puranam Gandhasindhur-Matt Haathi 48022 Garbhik-Garb ka balak
70.342 Galantika-Jhary 71.91 Gavlottam-Uttam Bhainsa 63.160 Gahan-Van 70.105 Gandhar-Kandhar 75.13 Gayakanik-Gayon ka samuh
74.270 Girish-Sumeru Parvat 71.43 Guru-Pita 75.578 Gomayu-Shagav 76.368 Gomini-Lakshmi 62.161 Granth-Parigrah 64.1
[] Ghati ghata-Ghatiya ko ka kshay karne vale 63.129
[Ch]. Chakrina-Chakravarti and Narayan
70.2 Chakret-Chakravarti 69.87 Chand-Atyant Rodhi 67.158 Chanddyuti-Surya 541102 Chandrorchish-Surya 73.60 Chandavikram-Atyant parakrami 55.3 Chaturang bal-Haathi, ghoda, rath
and padati-paidal sena, it is called chaturang sena 62051 Chaturthaleshy-Fourth padmalestha ka dharak 54183 Chandropagrah-Chandragrahan 6115 Chapet-Chappar-Chanta 70.350 Charmaangdhara-Tadbhavamokhsagami 48.132 Chaamiker-Suvarna 616106 - Chaamikerchhavi-Suvarna ke saman kantivala 4873 Charan dvandva-Charan Ravidhari do muni 75.531
Chittaja-Kaam 74.138 Chitaadhakah-Papon ka sanchay karne
wala 57198 Chiputnasika-Chapati nak vale 76445
[Chha] Chhaya-Kanti 70.225
[J] Janmavarashi-Sansar Sagar 62.293 Jambhuk-Shrigala 76.356 Jayadhvaj-Vijay pataaka
72.15 Jalajanana-Kamal Mukhi
761141 Jatsanved-Jise vairagya utpann hua hai 488 Jatarup-Suvarna 56.153 Jatarupata-Digambar mudra
74.90 Jamadagny-Jamadagni ka putra
65.149 Jambavtvish-Jamun ke saman
kantivale, kale 51.28 Jitvari-Jitne wali 51134 Jighamsa-Marne ki ichchha
59 213 Jin-Tirthankar 7012 Jimut-Megha 5215 Joshm-Chup 75.27 Jwalakaralagna-Jwalaon se bhayankar agni 71.15
[2] Jhshaketu sukhavaha-Kamsukh ko dene wala-stri 63.117
[T] Tanusthiti-Shahar 71.433 Tantra-Swarashtra chinta 62.34 Tapas tanunapat-Taparupi agni 58 178
[G] Gagan gochar-Vidhyadhar raja
70.267 Gany-Sankhyat 66.59 Gatpraan-Mrit 75674 Gatasu-Mrit 48.123

Page #693:
---------------------------
Talprahar-Chappad 74.108 Talwar-Kotwal 70.154 Tanav-Krishta 66.98 Tanav-Body related 66.98 Tuj-putra 70.15 Tuyakalyan-Jnankalyanak 61143 Turyavgamotkarsh-Manahparyay Jnan 
Ko Utkrishtata 59.203 Tok-putra 57486 Trunbhukkul-Group of animals 71.162 Tritiyaavgam-Avadhijnana 63.27 Trayastrishatsamudrayu-Thirty-three oceans' lifespan, an innumerable number of years, one ocean. Here, for the sake of the meter, the synonym of ocean, 'samudra', has been used. 48.13 Trayak-Protector 76.407 Trijagatpati-Tirthankara 67.24 Trijnana lochan-Avadhijnani 48.44 Nirdhanthi-Three Pradakshina 70.31 Trishuddhi-Mind, speech, body purity 70.2 Tvashtuyog-Brahmayog 71.38
Common Dictionary Humnadyuti-Golden radiance-Narpatya-Kingdom (Narpateah karma wala 66050 Napatyam) 48.30 Dhussad-Dev 57.30
Nikritt-Cut, severed Dakshya-Cleverness 75.350 71.101 Daser-Daughter's son 621326 Nidhish-Kubera 7124. Divasavasiti-Evening Niprvichar-Without sexual intercourse 61.12 74.304
Nibandhan-Cause 72.7.
Nighrun-Cruel 6820 Divyasadas-Samavasaran 62.486
Nirvinna-Sad 48.138 Divij-Dar 70.385 Divijendra-Devendra 68.38
Nirvriti-Moksha 48094 Divaukas-Dev 70.11
Niveg-Vairagya 63.109
Nived-Vairagya 49.3 Durgat-Poor 701200
Niam-Without the expanse of war Dusyalakshma-Marked with bad omens 613 67.159
Nilimp-Dev 63.113 Drpta-Arrogant 63.161
Nilimpesh-Indra 51138 Devbhuyam-Synonym for Dev 74/75
Nishtha-Completion 54.29. Devadri-Supeeru mountain 70.292
Nishthitarth-Kritakritya 63.273 Daishtik-Destiny believer 541262
Nishpand-Nischeshta 48.123 Dordand-Bhujadand 55.3
Nishi-Sword, cruel 54122 Dosh-Bhuma 62.263
Nisrushtarth-Rajadut 73.121 Dauhad-Dohla 70.343
Nissang-Self-Nirgranth state Dvopardhachakravar-Manushottar mountain 70.46 54135
Nihatsakalghati-Jnanaavaran, [ ]
Darshanaavaran, Moh and Antdhanesh-Kubera 7142
Ray these four ghatiyakarmondharaghochar-Bhumigopar king who destroys 6155 70.267
Nairgunya-Fruitlessness 5015 - Dharmaadhyaksh-Judge 76.340 Naisajay-Nirgranth state 617 Dharmaadhikaran-Judge 59. Nyagrodh-Banyan tree 668
Nyayya-Just 633375 Dha-Dharmayukt 633375 Dhritayati-Marked with a beautiful future 
Panchavarg-Five's group, i.e. 5x 5= 25 fifty 63.455 Dhyati-Meditation 61152
Pashvaan-Lust 75.336
Panchamanakshatra-Mrigashira nakshatra [n]
49.16 Namoyayi-Vidhyadhar 70.104 - Panchmaavarpaar-Five shores. Nakish-Devendra 541171
Samudra 57 33 Magara-Dharanendra 67.175 Pashnamambudhi-Ksheersagar 67443
174
Dammajaman-Hypocrisy's expanse
49.1 Dar-Less 48021 Darnira-Short sleep 633387 Darpisht-Arrogant 62.122 Dvij-Bird 668 Dvij-Tooth 76.392 Dvijaveki-Row of teeth 751568 Dvitiyakalyan-Birth Kalyanak
Festival 69.31 Ghugayak-Singer of Swarg 57.29 Muni-Laukantik Dev 66543
84

Page #694:
---------------------------
Panchamavagamesh - Panchamajnan -
The owner of Kevalgyan 49657 Panchamigati-Moksha 49.57 Pathya-Harad 75 || 375 Padma-Lakshmi 52.1 Payoj-Shankh 71.139 Payodharpath-Pakash 67.276 Paraman-Kheer 56147 Parasvahrut-Chor 76581 Paray-Shreshtha 75246 Parayamani-Shreshthamani 68.197 Parasuta-Mrityu 70.341 Parivrudh-Swamo 74.299 Parishadal-Samamen
Balavan 61156 Parv-Purnima 631417 Pal-Mans 712271: Palit-White hair 67.216 Pathin-Machch 73.161 Patresamitataidanyam-Keval food inclusion humility 48.101 Pad-Quarter Mag 48.29 Parana-Food after the fast 76.134 Paramatmya-Parmatmapad-Moksha
75.177 Pashan-Veena's defect
70.272 Pind-Gras 76.41. Pindit-Collected 5148. Pindim-Ashoka tree 68.130 Pitruvan-Ramashan 75.227 Piyushaashi-Dev 66.21 Purushkar-Purusharth 62.37 Purusharthtray-Dharma, Artha, Kama-These three Purusharths 53.5 . Pulastiputra-Ravan 68.325 Pulindi-Millki woman 71.403 Pushpeshjar-Kamajwar 62.46
Uttarapuranam Purvanupurvi-Purvacharyon ka Anu.
Taking refuge 70.3 Prakirnak-Chamar 63.1 Praja-Janata 4816 Prajapati-Brahma 54.117 Pragyapti-A Vidya 63.31 Pratikriya-Pratikar 621118 Pratichand-Adarsh 54.42 Pratidatt-Gift in return
62.105 Pratistammi-Opponent 66.111 Prati sthakalp-Prati sthashastra
54149 Pratikshya-Padigahkar 49.39 Praya-Moochchha 48.63 Pravajya-Deeksha 657 Prasrayashray-Vinay ka badhar
73.45 Pratavya-Worthy of sending 58.68 Prakrit-Simple 72157 Pragj-First Tpanna Huma
72.155 Prachya-First 76.410 Pranatendra-Fourteenth heaven's Indra
55.22 Prantkalp-Achyutswarga 48.143 Prantkalpeshwar-Achyutswarga ka
Swami 66.101 Prabhrut-Gift 5990 Preenit-Satisfied 75.1 Pretnath-Yam 681335 Praish-Work 485101. Proshityoshit-Whose wife has gone on a journey 63178
[B] Bhallanki-A dwelling of Bhils
71.309 Bhavant-Moksha 64.55 Maginey-Manej 72.268 Mavitdvayashtakaranah-Thinking of sixteen causes of emotions 618 Bhaswar-Shining 61.123 Bhoomij-Mangal 751489 Bhuyasi-Very heavy 485103 Bhogi mogaabhai-Like a snake's hood 48183
[M] Magadhadhip-Jarasangh 71169 Makshu-Shoghra 657 Manikar-Jeweler 751454 Mativattma-Very intelligent
62181 Madhumas-Chaitramas 6377 Manahparyayvikshan-Holder of Manahparyaygyan 48.46 Mand-Shani 75.489 Mandarag-Mandar+Ag-One
Mountain 66.100 Mandarag-Holder of mild raga
60.100 Mandasan-Hans 75.547 Manorajas-Dust in the form of mind's emotions
63.122 Manorama-Woman 7075 Marut-Dev 54 || 30 Marutsangh-Group of Devas 67154 Marutsadas-Devasama 63.282 Marunmag-Sky 48.60 Mahadevi-Chief Queen 51020 Mahishimandal-Group of buffaloes
63.160 Matang-Chandala 72631 Matangi-Chandali 72.241 Madhav-Vaishakh 615
[B] Bal-Balabhadra 7012 Ballav-Gopal-Ahir 63.160 Bahulpash-Krishnapaksh 67.41 Bahya parichchhad-Pana badi bahya
Parikar 52.4 Bodhya-Object to be known 621

Page #695:
---------------------------
## Magical Color Player
76.90
Gemini Couple 70182 Fist-Moon 70 350
51.28
Mooj's Deer-Hunter - Deer-Hunter
71.157
Creation-Bond-Death
Group
70.208
Death-Capital Death-Form Root-Capital
69/6
Cloud-End-Autumn Season 61.24 Coitus - Year 75.430 [y]
Ascetic-Group - Muni-Group 56 54 Yama - Couple 701384 Desire-to-Fight - Desire to Fight
76.276
Yoga - Attainment of the Unattainable 62.35
Force
[<]
Protected Alley 76/335 Victory-Mountain - Victory-Half
62.21
King-Bull - Chakravarti 6788 King-Lion-Character - King-Lion's Life which became Honey-Bee
Holder 56.18
61.75
Rudra-Intelligence - Vast Intelligence 71.2
Wave - Vast
Splendor's
Mountain

[l]
Lap 51.37
Love-Best - Ahminndra 69 91 Lipsu - Desiring to Obtain 76.175
Lomaans - A Flaw in the Veena 70.271
People Thirsty 48.117 Bolaralita - Fickle Bumblebee-ness 51.38
General Dictionary
[ v ]
Vaxodanam - Chest
 
-
68.146
Vachohar - Messenger 68|407 Generous - Generous-Hearted, Noble-Hearted
52/39 Merchant-Best-Refuge-Road Fragrance-Strong
House 75.659
Forest-Born - Lotus 708252
Forest-Born-Maker - Lotus-Maker, Pond 70/252
Forest-Guard - Wild
Elephant
63.159
Vandar - Praise-Reader, Charan
7190
Three-Varna - Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra - In Videha region, these are the only three Varnas. Brahmin Varna does not exist 54.11
Valmamaashi - Truth-Speaker 63.256
Vallaki - Veena 70 264 Vasudhara - Jewels' 51.20 Vasudhageh - Earth-House, Basement 68.28
Proof
Vachaat - Very
70.229
Stream
Vastak - Ikara 67.306 Vagvis - Divine Sound 63.76 Speaker
Verbal Message 620103
Vataarit - Castor Tree 63/64
Badakandativadako
Itch 72.14 Badakanduyya - Itch to Argue 63.50
Air-Path - Light 71.411 Varunid - West Direction
68205
Varmukkarmuknirmasi - Like a Rainbow, Mortal 48.126

Vas - Indra 5611 Vi - Bird 68.343 Vikayasayak - Desire's
70 68
Vikurch - Without Beard and Moustache
701488
667
Arrow
-
Vikritdhim - Change
Holder 48.45 Vikrama - Step 70.210 Vigatasuta - Death 62.356 Vigrah - Body 59.102 Vigrah - War 680417 Vidhat - Obstacle 63.128 Vichikitsa - Weakness 62 501 Vijayabj - Conch of Victory
Prosperity's
68.631
Vita - Vaishya-Daughter 75.72 Vitarka - Thought 51.10 Vidushyani - Assembly 701280 Vidvar - Best Scholar 62.124 Vidha - Food 59/268 Vidhi - Fool 7488 Vidhutavaikaly - Complete 63/417 Vinamyanvaya - Humble Lineage 688
Vinarasachar - Without the Movement of Humans 75.113
Vipakshak - Without Wings 68 343 Vipashitpandhan - Made Without 71.4
Viputra - Without Son 70.84 Vipunyaka - Without Merit 70.201 Vipralamma - To Cheat 67.347 Vibhramsha - Destruction 74189 Chichandishu - Desiring to Bow
Desiring 67.3 Vishanpati - Prajapati - King 4832
Vishrasavadhi - Until Death 58 9 Vishrambh - Trust 54.145

Page #696:
---------------------------
## Uttarapurana

**Vishvakshitisha-** King of the Universe
**62.122 Vishvanarthin-** Desiring food
**Sharm-** Comfort, **Sukha-** Happiness, **611 Sharmparampra-** Tradition of comfort and happiness
**48.55 Shalatu-** Raw fruit, **481117 Shalya-** A defect in a Veena (musical instrument), **70.271 Shankar-** One who brings peace and happiness, **7011 Shakathika-** Charioteer
**Vishamat-** Snake, **71.214 Vishaya-** Country, **48.3 Vishtpanalika-** A vein in the body, a vein in the earth. This vein is located in the middle of the earth. It is fourteen Rajus high and one Raju wide. **51317 Vishnuvidheya-** Servant of Krishna
**70.482 Vishvanan-** Food, **76.136 Vitghrun-** Merciless, **67.309 Vidhra-** White, **33 Vritraha-** Indra, **76.30 Vejit-** Trembling, **76.399 Vaimukhya-** Adversity, **7118 Vaiyatya-** Arrogance, **70.265 Vairagyakashta-** Highest level of detachment, **61290 Chaishravanopam-** Like Kubera
**70.147 Gyasu-** Dead, **71015**

**[Sh]** **Shakatakara-** Shaped like a chariot, a knowledge from Kansa's previous birth, **701419 Shachipati-** Indra, **74.357 Shabdashastra-** Grammar, **54021 Shamphali-** Messenger, **63.123 Shayu-** Python, **59||313 Sharad-** Autumn, **69.80 Sharabyapti-** Spread of the grass called Gondra. The spread of arrows in a battle, **69.21 Sharava-** Earthen pot, **74 342 Sharira Sannyasa-** Renunciation of the body, death in Samadhi, **69.12**
**Shakhaamriga-** Monkey, **761441 Shikshaka-** Teacher, **Parameshti-** Supreme Lord
**48.44 Sheetka-** Slow, sluggish in action, **68.437 Shuklapakshanta-** Full moon, **615 Shuklaaleshyavaya-** Possessing both material and spiritual white qualities, **61.11 Shuvisukla-** Jyeshtha Shukla, **61352 Shulka-** Tax, **76.410 Shulkameeluk-** One who takes away tax, **701128 Shokashani-** Thunderbolt of sorrow
**48.62 Shaundakarini-** A type of weapon
**701347 Shwani-** Hell, **75216**

**Sama-** Year, **6193 Samadhan-** Concentration of wealth, or Samadhi, **48.13 Samasamanivriti-** One who is about to attain liberation, **49.3 Samprardhana-** Promise, **48170 Samphali-** Messenger, **54.212 Samminnashrotru-** One who knows the cause, **6283 Sambhuya-** Together, **62.112 Sambhramta-** Confused, **62.115 Sammada-** Joy, **51522 Sammukhina-** Mirror, **49.1 Sammukhina Talopama-** Like a mirror, **66.30 Sanjuga-** Battle, **57176 Sanrammasambhrita-** Filled with anger, **63.161 Sapashyaya-** Snake bed, a jewel of Krishna, **70.441 Sashan-** Peacock, **67.29 Sarvagirvan-** All gods, **636410 Sanveganjanaka-** Causing fear, **70.2 Sahasadhana-** With an army, **751647 Sahasrasamayushka-** One who lives for a thousand years, **71.123 Sahasraksha-** Indra, **50123 Sanhata-** United, **64.3 Sadhana-** Army, **6180 Samaja-** Elephant, **59.197 Samaya-** With disease, **589 Samavayikata-** Help, **6841 Sarva-** Beneficial to all, **53.11 Savadha-** With sin, **51.10 Savashttamma-** Arrogant, **62.176 Siddhartha-** Successful, **48.136 Singhvahin-** A type of knowledge, **62.112 Singhvistar-** Throne, **633149**

**Shatopavasa-** Two-day fast, **64||39 Shodasha Sama-** Sixteen years, **75.690**

**[S]** **Sajani-** With a woman, **6sh22 Sanchitaya-** One who accumulates wealth, **49.57 Saparya-** Worship, **674 Saptchchhad-** Seven leaves, **61142 Sapreksha-** Thoughtful, **70.212 Samavart-** Yama, **61178 Samavarti-** Yama, **684606**

Page #697:
---------------------------
Health-well-being, death in the favor 58.106.
Year
Sitapagbhagbhushana-Sita river's south bank's ornament form 48058 Siripani-Balabhadra-Aparajit
63.26 Siri-Balabhadra 761485 Suduna-extremely sorrowful 68.219 Sudhasan-deva 73173 Sudhasin-amrit-bhogi deva
70.295 Sunasir-Indra 62 490 Supratistha-good reputation-from liberated
70.52 Suprabhut-very heavy 70.131 Suralanjika-Apsara 62.368 Sureta-Indra 50.25 Suvrat-excellent vratas-from united 67.1 Supshastra-cooking science 59.266
General dictionary Sainhikeya-Rahu 62.431 Sodaya-sibling brother 63.157 Saudarya-sibling sister 75582 Saugat-Buddhist 63158 Sautrantika-Buddhists' one kind
63150 Soudhavristhi-amrit's
59.295 Sauri-Sun's 70320 Stanayisnuka-medy 76.146 Sthalapan rose 71.103 Sthanu-Rudra 74.332 Sthitikriya-samyagdarshan's one
Bang 63.319 Nav-nirjara 48152 Swaprajasama:-own offspring's
equal 48.3 Swasanviti-swasanvedan 66191
[ ] Hari-Indra 51186 Hari-Singh 71.112 Hari-horse 71184 Harinil-Indranilamani 62148 Haribal-Krishna's army 71581 Harivishta-throne 75.39 Harisunu-Pradyumna 72.127 Hareharit-Indra's direction, east direction 54.69 Halayudha-Balabhadra 61483 Hali-Basmadar 59.28. Halesh-Aparajit Balabhadra 6214 Harini-beautiful 63.437 Hridya-heart's dear 54.192 Haimani-Hemant related 59.32

Page #698:
---------------------------
Akampan -  Lord Mahavira's Ganadhara 74.374 Akampan - King of Varanasi, father of Sulochana 74.146 Akampan - Son of King Chetak 75.15 Akampan Guru - A Muni, leader of seven hundred Munis 70.279 Akala Varsha - King contemporary to Acharya Gunabhadra. Prashasti 31 Akshara - A king of the Yadava clan 71.74 Agandhan - A Sapika name 59.177 Agnibhuti - Son of Paranojat Brahmin 620326 Agnibhuti - A Brahmin of Vatsapuri 75/74 Agnibhuti - Brother-in-law of Somadev of Champapur 720229 Agnibhuti - A Brahmin of Sutika Gram 74.74 Agnibhuti - Somadev Brahmin, resident of Saligram, son of Agnilab Brahmin 7264 Agnibhuti - Lord Mahavira's Ganadhara 74.373 Agni Mitra - Being in the previous birth of Lord Mahavira 761536 Agni Mitra - A Brahmin of Vatsapuri 75171 Agni Mitra - Son of Gautam, resident of Mandirgram 74.77 Agniraj - An enemy of Kalasambar, king of Hemakuta Nagar 72173 Agni - Last Shravak of Panchamkal 761433 
Vyakti Vachan Shabdakosh Agnilab - Wife of Agnibhuti 72.230 Agnilab - Wife of Dharanijat Brahmin 621326 Agnilab - Wife of Somadev Brahmin, resident of Saligram 7113 Agnishikha - A king of Varanasi 66.106 Agnisam - Being in the previous birth of Lord Mahavira 76535 Agnisah - Son of Agnibhuti and Gautami 74.74 Agrakumbh - A Vidyadhar of Ravana's side 681430 Angad - A king of the Yadava clan 71173 Angaraveg - Son-in-law of Asaniveg 701256 Achal - Son of Andhakavrishti and Subhadra 70.96 Achal - Son of King Brahma of Dwaravati, born from his wife Subhadra. This is Balbhadra 58.83 Achyutesh - Being of the undefeated Balbhadra 63331 Ajgar - Being of Tarak, Shribhuti, Satyaghosh, who came out of the third hell and became an Ajgar 59.236 Ajit - Second Tirthankara Ajitnath 48.1 Ajitjanjay - King of Ayodhya Nagar, in the Alka Desh, related to the Bharat Kshetra of Dhaatkokhand Dwip 54.87 Ajitjanjay - King of Gandhar Nagar 633384 Ajitjay - Son of Kalkiraj 76428 Ajitay - A Charan Muni with Riddhi 74.173 Ajitkshay - Main questioner of Lord Munisuvratnath 76.532 Ajitsen - King of Hastinapur 633382 Ajitsen - Son of Lord Ajitnath 48.36 Ajitsen - Son of King Mahendravikram of Kavanatilka Nagar 63.106 Ajitsen - A Muni 63.114 Ajitsen - Son of King Ajitjanjay and Queen Ajitsena, Shrighardev's being 54192 Ajitsena - Queen of Ajitjanjay, king of Ayodhya 54187 Ajitsena - Queen of Arijay, king of Arindampur 70.30 Ajita - Queen of Astijanjay, king of Gandhar Nagar 63.384 Anjanparvat - Ram's elephant 68.545 Anjanadevi - Wife of Prabhajan 68276 Anjanasunu - Hanuman 68.280 Anuman - Son of Prabhajan and Bajanadevi, another name for Hanuman 68 280 Atikanyark - A Vidyadhar of Ravana's side 68431 Atithi - Wife of King Suyodhan of Charanyugal Nagar 67.214 Atibal - Upcoming seventh Baryana 76.488 Atibal - Being of an Asura, Ratnakant 63.136

Page #699:
---------------------------
Atibala-Harivikramka's servant 75.481 Ati Mukta-A Muni 70.370 Atiratha-Pundarikinī Nagari's King Ratishaṇa's son 51312 Atirupaka-Devaraman Van's Vyantardev 631278 Atirupa-A Devi 631285 Ativega-Dharṇītilak Nagar's King Vidyadhar 59.228 Ativega-Prithiva Tilakpura's King 59.241 Atishayamati-Dasharay's minister 671185 Atoran-Upcoming Chod Hithankar's Jiva 76.473 Adhokshaj-Krishna 71.353 Anagar-Bhagavan Shitalnath's chief Ganadhar 56.50 Ananga-Pradyumna 72.168 Anangapataka-King Satyandhar's wife 751254 Ananta-A Ganadhar 6814 Ananta-A Muni 63.177 Ananta-A Muni 58.283 Anantajin-Videhakshetra's Jinendra 57.8 Anantamati-Shrikanta's ordinary female slave 62.352 Anantamati-Bharat Chakra's wife 74/50 Anantavirya-A Muni 67.66 Anantavirya-A Muni 67.3 Anantavirya-Mathura's King 59.302 Anantavirya-Jambudvipa's Vinita-Ayodhyanagari's King 70.147 Anantavirya-Ayodhya's King, Sanatkumar Chakravarti's father 61.104 Anantavirya-King Stimit Sagar and Anumati Rani's son. He is Manichul's husband 621414 Anantavirya-A Muni 71.312 Anantavirya-Upcoming 24th Tirthankar 766481 Anantasen-Balabhadra Baur Narayan's sent warrior 62.503 Anantasen-Aparajit Balabhadra's son 63.26 Anantseṇa-Bharat Chakravarti's wife 62188 Anantashro-Nandan Nagar's King Amitvikram and Rani Anandamati's daughter 63.13 Anavarta-Jambudvipa's Dev 76.37 Anindita-Ratnapur's King Shrisheṇa's wife 62.340 Aniruddha-Pradyumna's 72.189 Anilvega-Vidyudamshṭra's wife 630241 Anilnandan-Anuman 681465 Anilaramaja-Banuman-Hanuman 680432 Anivarti-Upcoming 20th Tirthankar 764480 Anikadatta-Vasudeva Baur Devaki's son 710296 Anikapal-Vasudeva Dhir Devaki's son 711296 Anukul-King Vajradant's Chetak 76.143 Anundari-Ratnasanchay Nagar's King Vishvadev's wife 71.387 Anundari-Chandrapur's King Mahendra's wife 711405 Anundharo-Podanpur's Vishvabhuți Brahman's wife 7328 Anundhari-Hastinapur's Kapi, Pthal Brahman's wife 70.161 Anunag-Dashpurva's Dharak Muni 76.522 Anupama-Matisagar's wife 75.258 Anupama-Rajpur's Seth Ratna Teja and Sethani Ratnamala's daughter 75.451 Anumati-Prabhakari Puri's King Stimit Sagar's second wife 621414 Andhakavrishti-Shuravir and Dharini's son 70.94 Andhavel-Bhagavan Mahavira's Ganadhar 74.374 Aparajit-Singhapur's King Arhadas and Rani Jitdatta's son 70.10 Aparajit-A Shruta Kevali Aparajit-Singhapur's King 70.43 Aparajit-Purva Videha's Tirthankar 69.39 Aparajit-Chṛpur's King who first gave offerings to Bhagavan Arhanath 65.35 Aparajit-Jarasantha's son 7109 Aparajit-Videha Kshetra's Vatsadesh related Sumimanagari's King 52.3 Aparajit-Prabhakaripuri's King Stimit Sagar and Vasundhara Rani's son. He is Ravichuldev's Jiva 62.413 Aparajit-Chakrapur's King 59.239

Page #700:
---------------------------
672
Aparajita-Bhagwan Munisuvratanayaka's Palaki 67140 Aparajita-Varanasi's Raja
Agnishikha's Stri. Nandimitra's M.ta 66.107 Aparajita-Uthini's Raja Vijay's Stro 711443 Apaap-Magami Thirteenth Tirthankara 76.479 Abhay-Raja Shrenikka's Putra
74.429 Abhayghosh-Ek Kevali, Jinke Paas Bhagwan Chakravarti ne Diksha Lo Yi 61 97 Abhayghosh-Ghatakikhandke Purv Airavat Kshetramen Sthit Tilaknagara ka Raja 63.168 Bhabayanndi-Ek Acharya
713205 Bhamayyayan-Bhagwan Sumatinath
Ki Palaki 51169. Aminandan-Prhandakavrishti aur Subhadraka Putra 70.96 Abhinandan-Chaturth Tirthankara
501 Abhimanyu-Arjunka Subhadra Stri
Se Utpanna Hucha Putra 720214 Amaraguru-Ek Muni 62403. Amit-Vidyuudanshtr ke Vimaan ka Naam 631242 Amitgun-Ek Muniraj
74.173 Amittej-Parkkiti aur
Jyotirmaala ka Putra 62152 Amittejas-Gaganvallbh Nagar ke Raja Gaganchandra aur Rani Gagansundari ka Putra 7040 Amitpram-Pundarikini Nagari men Sthit Amitprabh Tirthankara 621361 Amitmati-Padhinikhet ke Sagar. Sen ki Stri 63.263
Uttarapuranaam Amitmati-Gaganvallbh Nagar ke Raja Gaganchandra aur Rani Gagansundari ka Putra 70.40 Amitvati-Mayura ke Raja Banantviriya ki Isri Stri 59.303 Amitvikram-Pushkara ke Purvadhi Bharat ke Nandana Nagar ka Raja 63312 Amitveg-Sthalakpura ka
Raja-Ek Vidyadhar 68.14 Amit Sagar-Ek Muni 711433 Amitsena-Rak Ganini
Bavika 62.367 Amritrasayan-Raja Chitraraath ka
Rasoia 70.271 Amritrasayan-Subhaum Pakravati
Ka Rasoia 65.156 Amrit Sagar-K Tirthankara
76.147 Amoghjihva-Ek Muni 62.196 Amoghjihva-Podanpura ke Nimittajnani 62.253 Amoghmukhi-Lakshman ki Shakti 68.675 Ambika-Khagapura ke Raja Singh
Sen ki Dvitiya Patni 6171 Ar-Athaarahven Tirthankara 65.1 Ar-Aayami Barahven Tirthankara 76.479 Arvind-Podanpura ka Raja 737 Arvindkumar-Bhagwan Aranath ka Putra 65.32 Arinjay-Arindampura ka Raja 70.30 Arikshay-Chitrapura ka Raja 62.67 Ariay-Kaushal Desh ke Saketnagar ka Raja 72025 Arikshay-Ek Muni, Bo Renukaka Bade Bhai The. 65.93
Ariay-Ek Charan Ridvidhari Muni 621348 Arijay-Harivkram ka Sevak
75.481 Arindam-Saket ke Raja Ari
Jay ka Putra 72028 Arindam-Ek Muni, Jinhone Ek Mah ke Upavas Kiye The 54|120 Arisht-Ek Asur 70.427 Bharishtasen-Aagami Barahva Chakravarti 761484 Arishtasen-Bhagwan Dharmanath ka Pramukh Gandhar 61.44 Arkakirti-Raja Chandram aur
Rani Subhadra ka Putra 74.135 Arkakirti-Jwalanjati Bor
Vayuvega ka Putra 62143 Arkatejas-Amittej ka Putra
621408 Arthswamini-Nagadatta ki Chhoti
Bahin 75.97 Ahndatt-Banadatt aur Nandayasha
Ka Putra 70.185 Ahhas-Barmpriya aur Gunadevi
Ka Putra 76.124 Ahnddas-Dhanadatt aur Nandayasha
Ka Putra 70.185 Arhadas-Jambudeep ke Paschim. Videh Kshetra Sambandhi Sugandhil Desh ke Singhpur Nagar ka Raja 70.4 Ahnddas-Rajagruhi ka Ek Seth
Jambu Swami ka Pita 76.36 Ahhas-Hastinapura ka Raja
72.38 Ahnddas-Ghatakikhand ke Paschim Videh Sambandhi Gandhil Desh ki Ayodhyanagari ka Raja 59.277

Page #701:
---------------------------
673
A Seth residing in Ahadas-Saketa 72.26 Ahrdasi-Bhagwan Shanti Nath's time's prominent Shravaka 63.494 Ahannand-Videha's Tirthankara 65.6 Ahannandan-Videha's Tirthankara 51113 Ahannandan-a Muni 53.13 Alakasundari-Thichandra's friend 75.444 Alka-Bhadrilnagar's merchant's daughter 70.385 Alka-Bhadrilpur's Sudrusti Seth's wife-Revati Dhaayaka's Jeev 712293 Ashanighosh-King Singhsen's elephant named Ashanighosh 69.197 Ashanighosh-Kashtangarik's elephant 753366 Ashanighoshak-Chamarchanbapur's Swami 62.229 Ashanighoshak-an elephant who was King Singhsen's Jeev 59.212 Asaniveg-Kashtangarik's elephant 751667 Asaniveg-Kinnaregit Nagar's Swami 70.254 Ashoka-Pushkalavati Desh's Pundarikini Nagari's King 71.394 Ashvakandhar-Ashvagrov's other name 57495 Ashvagriv-Alka's King Mayurgriv's son 62.59 Ashvastham-Jarasandh's side's distinguished man-Dronacharya's son

Person-related words dictionary
[A] Agamsar-King Dashrath's minister 67.183 Aditya-Champapura's King 70.112 Aditya-a Muni 75.394 Adityagati-a Parana Riddhi-dhari Muni 621348 Adityam-a Dev 59.132 Adityam-Kantav Swarg's Dev-Balbhadra's Jeev 59.281 Adimendra-Soudharmendra 7148 Aadyajin-First Tirthankara-Bhagwan Rishabhdev 48.26 Anand-a Muni 56:16 Anand-Dhataki Khand's Ashoka Pura's Seth 711433 Bhanand-Ayodhya's King Vajrabahubir Rani Prabhankari's son 73.43 Anandmati-Nandanpur's Pamitvikram Raja's wife 63313 Anandayasha-Ashokpur's Banand Seth's daughter 711433 Amramari (Chutamari) Vaishravana Seth's wife 75.348 Aryavarma-Singhpur's King 751281 Asur-Shanishosh's mother 621229
[I] Indra-Dyutilakpur's King
Chandrama's minister 74.141 Indragiri-Gandhar Desh's Pushkalavati Nagar's King 711425 Indracharm-Ravan's side's Vidyaadhar 680431 Indrajit-Ravan's son 68.298
Indradatt-Bhagwan Abhinandanath's first food giver Saketa Nagar's King 50||54 Indradatt-Shukramprabhpur Nagar's
King 63.92 Indrabhuti-Dharnijata Brahmin's
son 62.326 Indrabhuti-a Brahmin, who
became Bhagwan Mahavira's Ganadhar 741357 Indravarma-Podanpur's King Chandradatt and Rani Devila's son 72.205 Indrasen-Ratnapur's King Shrishen
's son 62.341 Indrasen-Kaushambi's King Mahabal and Rani Shrimati's daughter Shrikant's husband 62.352 Indrasen-Jarasandh's side's
King 7178 Indraram-Jamadagni and Renu
's son 65192 Indraashani-Shanighosh's father
62.229 Indu-Jwalanjattik a messenger 62.97
[U] Ugrasen-Naravrushti and Padmavati.
's son 70.100 Ugrasen-Mathura's King
70.331 Ugrasen-Yadav's side's
King 71175 Ugrasen-Ugravanshi Raja-Raji
Matik's father 71.145 Ugrasen-Mahaseen and Sundari
's son 76.265 Ugrasen-Bhagwan Neminath's main questioner 761532

Page #702:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**674**
Uttara Purana
Uttarakuru - Lord Neminath's Palaki 69.53
Udak - The third Tirthankara to come
76.471 Udak - The 12th Tirthankara to come
764478 Udayan - King of Roruk Nagar in Katchchh Desh
75.12 Uddhav - A king from the Yadava clan
71183 Upendra - Son of King Chetak
75.4 Upendrasen - King of Ratnapura
Son of Shrishen 621341 Upendrasen - Brother of Indrasen
621353 Upendrasen - King of Indrapura
65179 Uma - Wife of Rudra 74.337 Usha - Second wife of Brahma, King of Dwaravati 58584
Kanakchula - A Vyantar Dev
63.186 Kanaktejass - A Vaishya of Rajpura
75.452 Kanakdhwaj - The fourth Kulkar to come
76.464 Kanakpad - The 21st Tirthankara to come
76.474 Kanakpukh - King of Shivamandrinavar, father of Damitar, father of Kirtipar 62488
Kanakpud - King of Kaprab Nagar 74/222
Kanakpungav - The fifth Kulkar to come
761464 Kanakpram - King of Ratnasanchay Nagar 54.130
Kanakpram - The second Kulkar to come
761463 Kanakmala - Wife of King Kanakprab 54.130
Kanakmaka - Daughter of Meghavahan and Vimala 633117
Kanakmala - Daughter of Mahendra, King of Chandrapura, wife of Chor Anundari 710406
Kanakmala - Wife of King Kanakaran of Amalkanth Nagar 72141
Kanakmala - Wife of King Kanakpukh of Kanakpura 744222
Kanakmala - Wife of Seth Kuberdatt of Rajagrihi 76.47
Kanakmalika - Wife of King Chakradhwaj of Vitashokpura 62.365
Kanakarath - King of Ashvapura 62.67
Kanakarath - King of Bamalkanth Nagar 72.41
Kanakraj - The third Kulkar to come 766464
Kanakalata - Daughter of Chakradhwaj and Kanakmalika 62.365
Kanakalata - King of Champapura, daughter of Shrishen and Dhanshri, wife of Somila 75.83
Kanakvati - Wife of Kanakojjval 74.223
Kanakojjval - Son of King Kanakpukh and Queen Kanakmala 74.222
Kanakojjval - The previous birth of Lord Mahavira 761541
Kanakshant - Son of King Sahasrayudh and Queen Shrishena 63.46
Kanakshanti - A king 63.117
Kanakshanti - A Muni 63.127
Kanakshri - Daughter of King Damitar 62.465
Kanakdhi - Daughter of Seth Kuberdatt of Rajagrihi and Kanakmala 76264
Katpram - The fifth Tirthankara to come 76.472
Kapil - Son of Gharnijatt Brahmin's slave woman 26||326
Kapil - A Brahmin of Saketa 74.68
Kapilak - Another name for Kapil (Nish Kapil) 62.343
Kapisthal - A Brahmin of Hastinapur 70.161
Kamath - Son of Vishvabhuthi and Anundari 7319
Kamala - Wife of Chitramati, the minister 59.255
Kamala - Wife of Bhuti Sharma, a Brahmin of Bhadrailpura 71.304
Kamala - Wife of Sagar Dutt, a Seth of Rajpura 75.587
Rijumati - A Charan, Muni Riddhighari 76.351
[Ai] Aira - Daughter of King Ajitangay and Queen Ajitarani. This same queen was the wife of Vishvasan and the mother of Lord Shantinath 631385
Aira - Wife of King Padmabh of Bhojpur 67.64
[Kanak] Kanak - The first Kulkar to come 766463
Kanakchitra - Wife of Ashvaniv 62.60
Kanakchitra - Wife of King Kshemankar of Ratnasanchay Nagar 63.38

Page #703:
---------------------------
##  Person-Specific Dictionary

**Kamalodara-Krishna** 71.375 **Kalinga-** King of Kalinga, on the side of Jarasandha 71.80 **Kalindasena-** Wife of Jarasandha 70.1354 **Karna-** Son born from the secret union of Pandu and Kunti 70.110 **Karna-** A king on the side of Jarasandha 71.177 **Kansa-** The soul of the sage Vashishtha, son of Ugrasena, king of Mathura, and Padmavati 71.347 **Kansari-** Krishna 71.413 **Kansarya-** A sage, one of the eleven Bangas 76.525 **Kakajadha-** A Chandala, the soul of Somadev Brahmin, father of Agnibhuti and Vayubhuti 72.31 **Kanchanamala-** Wife of Kalasambar, king of Meghamutnagar 72.55 **Kanchnalata-** Wife of Mahabala 75.198 **Kanchnalata-** Wife of Mahabala 75.118 **Kabana-** Maid of Manorama 63.152 **Katyayani-** The main Ayika of the congregation of Lord Nemnath 71.186 **Kanayavan-** A son of Jarasandha 71.11 **Kama-** Pradyumna 72.1112 **Kamadhenu-** The name of a Vidya 65.98 **Kamaroopini-** A ring of Pradyumna 72.116 **Kala-** A Bhil of the village called Mallanki 71.310 **Kalak-** A king of the Bhils, residing in Ulkamukhi 70.156 **Kalak-** A Bhil, to whom Chandana gave her ornaments 75.146 **Kalika-** Wife of Pururava Bhil 74.16 **Kalakut-** Master of the Bhils 75.287 **Kalamegha-** Elephant of Ravana 68.1540 **Kalasambar-** King of Meghamutnagar, a Vidyadhar 72.55 **Kalasaukarik-** A man residing in Rajgriha 74.455 **Kalangarik-** Son of Kashtangarik 75.292 **Kalingi-** Wife of Puritarthichchha 70.99 **Kashyapa-** Wife of Ahendas, king of Hastinapur 72.139 **Kashtangarik-** Minister of King Satyandhar 75.190 **Kiritmitra-** Brother of Shrichandra 75.491 **Kichak-** Prince of Bhushan Shail city 72.215 **Kirti-** A Goddess 63.1200 **Kirtidhar-** Father of King Damitar 62.1489 **Kukkutasarpa-** The soul of Shribhuti Satyagosh 59.217 **Kunik-** Father of King Shrenik 74.418 **Kunik-** Son of King Shrenik, born from his Chelini queen 76.041 **Kunal-** The main questioner of Lord Shantinath 76.531 **Kunti-** Daughter of Bandhakavrishti and Subhadra 70.197 **Kunthu-** The first Ganadhar of Lord Shreyansnath 57.154 **Kunthu-** The 17th Tirthankar 64.2 **Kuber-** A Seth of Ratnapura 67.193 **Kuberdatta-** Son of Sagardatta and Prabha Kari 76.218 **Kuberdatta-** A Seth of Rajgrihi 76.147 **Kuberdatta-** Daughter of Kuber Seth, of Ratnapura city 67.94 **Kumar-** Son of King Shrenik, Abhaykumar 75.24 **Kumardatta-** A Seth of Rajpura 75.351 **Kumud-** A Vidyadhar 68.390 **Kumbha-** Master of Singhapura city 62.205 **Kumbha-** Father of Lord Mallinath, king of Mithila 66.20 **Kumm-** A Vidyadhar on the side of Ravana 68.430 **Kumaya-** The main Ganadhar of Lord Barnaath 62.39 **Kurang-** A Bhil, the soul of Kamath 73.37 **Kuryavar-** Nephew of Duryodhana 72.268 **Kulputra-** The seventh Tirthankar, Shagami 76.478 **Kulvanij-** A Vaishya 75.105 **Kushalamati-** Commander of King Janak's army 67.1169 **Kusumchitra-** The assembly of Krishna 71.141 **Kusumshri-** Wife of Pushpadanta, the garland maker of Rajpura 75.1528 **Kul-** King of Kulgram, the first person to offer food to Lord Mahavira 74.1319

Page #704:
---------------------------
676
Uttarapurana
Kritavarman - King of Kampilya Nagar, father of Bhagwan Vimalnath 59.15 Kritviraadhip - Raha Sahasrabahu
and Chitramatika's son 65.58 Krip - Jarasandha's supporter, a
King 71.78 Kripvarma - Jarasandha's supporter, a
King 71.78 Krishnachay - Guru by this name
61.162 Keshav - Narayan 59.63 Keshav - Lakshman 68/631 Keshav - Shrikrishna 71.76 Keshavati - King of Varanasi
Agni Shikha's wife, adopted mother 66.107 Kesari Vikram - King of Surakantara Nagar - a Vidyadhar
Kaikeyi - Wife of King Dashrath of Varanasi 67.150 Kounteya - Yudhishthira, Bheem and Arjun, these three Pandavas 72.270 Kaumudi - Lakshman's gada
68.1673 Kauravanath - Duryodhan 72.268 Kaushik - A tapas 62.380 Kaushiki - Wife of Gautam Brahman of Mandirgram 74.77 Kaustum - Lakshman's mani
68.1676 Kridav - Son of King Ahendas and Queen Kashyapi of Hastinapur - Vayu Bhootika Jiva 72.39 Kshatriya - Magami Shashth Teerthankar
Jiva 76.472 Kshatriyantak - A Muni who holds the Dashpurva 76.521
Shanti - An Aryika 72.249 Kshirakadamb - Swastikavatika
A teacher 67.4258 Kshemankar - King of Ratna Sanchay Nagar in Mangalavati Desh 63.38 Kshemkar - A Teerthankar 63.112 Kshemkar - A Teerthankar in Videh Kshetra 73.34 Kshemankar - A Teerthankar 74.238 Kshemsundari - Daughter of Subhadra Seth and Niti Sethani 75.411 Khadirsar - A Bhil, Jiva of the third previous birth of King Shrenik 74.390 Khar - A Vidyadhar on Ravana's side
Ghar 68.1431 Kharadushan - A Vidyadhar on Ravana's side 68.431
[G] Gaganchandra - King of Gaganavallabh Nagar 70.139 Gaganchar - Son of Chandrachula and Manohari
71.0252 Gaganandan - Son of Chandrachula and
Manohari 71.0252 Gagan Sundari - Wife of King Gaganchandra of Gaganavallabh Nagar 70.40 Ganga - Son of Ganga Dev and Nandayasha
71.262 Ganga Dev - King of Hastinapur
71.0262 Ganga Dev - Son of Ganga Dev and Nandayasha
71.262 Ganga Dev - A Muni who holds the Dashpurva 76.522 Gangamitra - Son of King Ganga Dev and Queen Bandayatha 71.262
Ganabaddh - A type of Dev
67.76 Gandhamitra - King of Saketapur
59.266 Gandhavdatta - A girl who will marry Vasudev 70.266 Gandharvadatta - Daughter of King Garudaveg and Queen Dharini 75.304 Gandhotkat - A Seth of Rajpur 75.198 Garuddhwaj - Son of Chandrachula and Mano.
Hari 71.251 Galvahan - Son of Chandrachula and Mano
Hari 71.2251 Gadaveg - King of Kanakpur
63.165 Garudaveg - King of Gaganavallabh Nagar in Vijayardh 75.302 Gandhari - Daughter of Naravrushti and Padma
vati 70.101 Gandhari - Wife of Dhritarashtra
70.117 Gandhari - A queen of Krishna
71.126 Gandhari - Daughter of King Indragiri and Queen Merumati of Pushkalavati Nagar, Krishna's Patt
Queen 71.426 Gunakanta - Wife of King Prajapati of Ratnapur 67.191 Gunadevi - Wife of Dharmpriya Seth
76.124 Gunapaak - A Muni 75.319 Gunapram - A Teerthankar 54.122 Gunamadr - A Paran Muni
70.324 Gunabhadra Bhadant - Author of Uttarapurana 57.67

Page #705:
---------------------------
##  Personal Noun Lexicon

**[G]**

* **Ghananunda-Priyamitraki Cheti:**  Cheti of Ghananunda and Priyamitra
* **Supena:**  A rooster (63.150)
* **Ghanarath-Mahapurke Raja Vayurathka Putra:**  Son of Vayurath, King of Mahapurke (58181)
* **Dhanarath-Hemaangad Bor Meghamalini ka Putra:**  Son of Meghamalini, Hemaangad Bor Dhanarath (63.181)
* **Ghanarath-Pundarikirani Nagarika Raja:**  King of Pundarikirani Nagari (63.143)
* **Ghosha:**  A type of Veena (70.295)
* **Ghoshaarya:**  Chief Ayika of the Sangha of Lord Pushpadanta (55.56)
* **Ghoshavati:**  A type of Veena (70.296)

**[C]**

* **Chakradhar-Krishna:**  Krishna, the Chakra-bearer (72.168)
* **Chakradhar-Pagami Tisra Balabhadra:**  Third Balabhadra, the Chakra-bearer (761485)
* **Chakradhwaj-Veetsokkapurka Raja:**  King of Veetsokkapur, the Chakra-bearer
* **Gunamanjari-Kanakpurke Raja:**  King of Kanakpur, a dancer of Sushena (58161)
* **Gunamala-Kumardatt Vaishya aur Vimala ki Putri:**  Daughter of Vimala and Kumardatt Vaishya (751351)
* **Gunamitra-Jivandhar ka Ek Sala:**  A brother-in-law of Jivandhar (75.429)
* **Gunamin-Rajpurke Ek Johari ka Putra:**  Son of a jeweler from Rajpur (754454)
* **Gunavati:**  An Ayika (59.232)
* **Gunavati:**  A Bayika (722226)
* **Goodadanta-Aagami Chautha Chakravarti:**  Fourth Chakravarti to come (76.482)
* **Gautam-Mrigaayan Tapas aur Vishala ka Putra Sudatt ka Jiv:**  Jiv of Sudatt, son of Vishala and Mrigaayan Tapas (701142)
* **Gautam-Hastinapurke Kapisthal Brahman aur Anundhari Brahmani ka Putra-Rudradatt ka Jiv:**  Jiv of Rudradatt, son of Anundhari Brahmani and Kapisthal Brahman from Hastinapur (70.131)
* **Godavari-Gopendra aur Gopashri ki Putri:**  Daughter of Gopashri and Gopendra (75.291)
* **Gopashri-Rajpurke Gopendra ki Stri:**  Wife of Gopendra from Rajpur (75.291)
* **Gopendra-Rajpurka Ek Gupon ka Raja:**  King of the Gopons from Rajpur (75.291)
* **Gopendra-Videh Desh Videh Nagar ka Raja:**  King of Videh Nagar in Videh Desh (75.644)
* **Govardhan:**  A Muni (63.184)
* **Govardhan:**  A Shruta Kevali (76519)
* **Gautam-Mandir Gaon ka Ek Brahman:**  A Brahman from Mandir village (74177)
* **Gautami-Sootikagram Niwasi Agnibhuti Brahman ki Stri:**  Wife of Agnibhuti Brahman, resident of Sootikagram (74/74)
* **Gauri-Krishna ki Ek Pattarani:**  One of Krishna's queens (71.126)
* **Gauri-Veetsokkapurka Raja Meru Pandar aur Rani Chandravati ko Putri-Krishna ki Pattarami:**  Daughter of Rani Chandravati and Raja Meru Pandar from Veetsokkapur, Krishna's queen (711440)
* **Chakranath-Krishna:**  Krishna, the Chakra-bearer (71.142)
* **Chakrayudh-Chakrapurke Raja Aparajit aur Unki Sundari Rani ka Putra-Singhchandra ka Jiv:**  Jiv of Singhchandra, son of Aparajit, King of Chakrapur, and his beautiful queen (59.239)
* **Chakrayudh-Vishvasen aur Yash. Swati ka Putra:**  Son of Yash. Swati and Vishvasen (631413)
* **Chakri-Krishna:**  Krishna, the Chakra-bearer (711413)
* **Chanchkantitlaka-Suvarna Tilak ki Dasi:**  Maid of Suvarna Tilak (633172)
* **Chandakoushik-Kumbhkarkat Nagar ka Ek Brahman:**  A Brahman from Kumbhkarkat Nagar (62.213)
* **Chandadanda-Kashtangarik ka Mukhya Nagar Rakshak:**  Chief city protector of Kashtangarik (75.377)
* **Chaturmukh-Patna ke Raja Shishupal aur Rani Prithvisundari ka Putra jo Kalki Naam se Prasiddha Huma:**  Son of Rani Prithvisundari and Raja Shishupal from Patna, known as Kalki (76.399)
* **Chandan-Padmagulm Raja ka Putra:**  Son of the King of Padmagulm (5615)
* **Chandana-Raja Chetak ki Chhoti Putri:**  Younger daughter of King Chetak (741338)
* **Chandnarya-Bhagwan Mahavir ke Sangha ki Pramukh Ayika:**  Chief Ayika of the Sangha of Lord Mahavir (75॥2)
* **Chandra-Mom Tapas aur Shridatta Tapasi ka Putra:**  Son of Shridatta Tapasi and Mom Tapas (631266)
* **Chandra-Aagami Pehla Balabhadra:**  First Balabhadra to come (761485)
* **Chandra Kirti-Champapur ka Raja:**  King of Champapur (7084)
* **Chandrachula-Ratnapur ke Raja Prajapati aur Rani Gunakant ka Putra:**  Son of Rani Gunak

Page #706:
---------------------------
678
Chapal Gati - Son of King Suryaprabha and Queen Dharini of Suryaprabhapur 70.29
Chapalvega - A Vidhyadhar King 62.381
Yeg - A Vidhyadhar 6846 Chapla-Shik
Tapaska
Stri 62.380
Chamar - Shri Bhooti - Satyagosh Mantri
Ka Jeev 59.196 Chamar-Asurakumaron ke
Indra
71.42
Chamar-Yadav Paksha ka ek Raja 71.75
Chanur-Kansa ka Pramukh Mall 01486
Chanurat Krishna 71.127 Charudatt - A Famous Person 701269
Charupad - Jeev of the upcoming 23rd Tirthankar 76/474 Charupen - Main Ganadhar among the 105 Ganadhar of Bhagwan Sambhavnath 49/43
Chitraguptaka - Upcoming 17th Tirthankar 76.479 Chitrachud - King of Kirgit Nagar 63.93
Chitrachud - A Vidhyadhar - Brother of Vasant Sena 63.128 Chitramati - Mantri of King Preetibhadra of Chark 59/255 Chitragati - Wife of King Sahasrabahu of Paket 6557 Chitramala - Second wife of King Aparajit 59.240 Chitrarath - King of Girinagar
71.271
Chitravarn - Dhanush of Prayukt

Uttarpuranam
Chitrasen - Servant of Harivkram
751480 Chitrasena - Daughter born from a Vaishya woman of Agni Mitra Brahmin 75/72
-
-
Chia - Paki of Bhagwan Neminath 71.160
Chitraangad - A Dev of Saudharma Swarg - Jeev of Veerdas Seth
70.72
Chitrad - King of Nishwalok
Nagar
Chandra Bor Rani Manohari ka Jyeshtha Putra - Mustika Jeev 71.250 Chitraangaddev - Saudharma
Dev - Jeev of Supratistha
70 1138
Chinta Gati - Messenger of Ashvagrov 62.124
Chinta Gati - Son of King Suryatram and Queen Parini of Suryaprabhapur
Swarg ka
70:28
Chudadavi - Mother of Brahmadatt Chakravarti
72.288
Chetak - King of Vaishali 7513 Chelini - Daughter of King Chetak 75/7
Chelini - Wife of King Shrenik 76.41
Chelketan - Father of King Lokaditya. Prasasti 13 Velladhvaj - Younger brother of King Lokaditya. Prasasti 33 [J] Jagannandan - A Charan Dwipari Muni 62.50 Jagandan - A Muni who received Diksha from Vyasnabati 62.148
Jagannath - Bhagwan Neminath 72.193

Jatil - Son of Kapil Brahmin and his wife Kali 74/68
Jatil - Jeev of Bhagwan Mahavira's previous birth 76.534 Janak - King of Mithila 67.166 Janakatmaja - Sita 68.163 Jamdagni - Son of Shat Bindu and Shrimati 65.60 Jambushena - Wife of King Jambav of Jambavanagar 71.369
Jambu - Wife of Satyaka Brahmin of Ratnapura 62.129
Jambu - Last Kevali 76.37 Jambuswami - Banmi Kevalo 764518
Jay - King of Nandanpur, who gave the first food to Bhagwan Vimlanath 59.42 Jay - A King of Yadav Paksha 71.73
Jay - A Muni who holds the Dashapurva 76/522 Jaykirti - Upcoming 10th Tirthankar 76.478
Jaygiri - An elephant of Jeevandhar
75.341
Jaygupta - A Nimittgyani
Nimitt
62/98 Jaygupta - Gyan of Podanpur 62.253 Jaydevi - Queen of King Kanakpul 620488
Jaydevi - Wife of King
Shank of Madargagar 63.177 Jaydratha - A King of Jarasandh's side
71.78
Jaydratha - Son of King Jayandhar and Queen Jayavati - Jeev of Jeevghar's previous birth
1671727

Page #707:
---------------------------
##  Person Name Glossary

**Jayant-Vitashokanagar** - King of Jayant-Vitashokanagar
**Jayant-Abhayghosh** - Son of Vaijayans, 59.110
**Jayant-Suvarna** - Son of Tilaka, 63.169
**Jayant-Bhagavan** -  Follower of  Mallingath, 66:46
**Jayandhar-Ghataki** -  Related to Videha region, located east of Meru in the eastern direction of Ghataki Khand island, Pushkala. 
**Jayapal** - King of  Pundarikininagar in Vati country, 751534
**Jayarama** - Wife of Sugriva, King of Kavandhi, mother of Bhagavan Pushpadant, 55.24
**Jayavati** - Wife of King Jayandhar, 75.539
**Jayashyama** - Queen of King Kritavarma of Kampilyanagar, mother of Bhagavan Vimlanath, 59.15
**Jayasen** - King of Prithvinagar, related to Vatsakavati country in Videha region, 4859
**Jayasen** - Son of King and Queen Prabhakari of Kaushambi, 69.80
**Jayasen** - King of Saketa-Ayodhya, 73.120
**Jayasen** - King of Supatishtatpur, 76.217
**Jayasena** - Queen of King Jayasen, related to Vatsakavati country in Videha region, 48059
**Jayasena** - King of Prabhakaripuri, wife of Nandan, 62176
**Jayasena** - Wife of Samudrasen, 63.118
**Jayavati** - Wife of Prajapati, King of Podanpur, 57.86
**Jayavati** - Wife of King Vasupujya, mother of Bhagavan Vasupujya, 58.18
**Jayavati** - Wife of King Ugrasen, mother of Rajimati, 71.145
**Jayavati** - Wife of Vijayamati, 75.258
**Jaratkumar** - Brother of Krishna, 72.181
**Jara** - King of Yadava faction, 7174
**Jarasandha** -  Pratinarayan, 701337
**Jarasanthar** - Krishna, 711346
**Jaldhisuta** - Daughter of King Duryodhan of Hastinapur, named Sadadhikumari, 72.134
**Jalmanthan** - Last Kalki, 76431
**Jatimata** - Son of Pushpadant Malakar of Rajpur, 75.528
**Janaki** - Sita, 681443
**Jambav** - King of Jambapanagar, 71.368
**Jambavati** - One of Krishna's queens, 71.126
**Jambavati** - Daughter of King Jambav and Queen Jambushena, 712369
**Jitshatru** - King of Saketa Nagar in Bharat Kshetra, father of Bhagavan Ajitnath, 48.19
**Jitshatru** - Father of Bhagavan Ajitnath, 48.23
**Jitshatru** - Son of King Bajitsen, 54.123
**Jitshatru** - Son of Vasudev and Devaki, 711296
**Jindas** - Son of Dhanadatt and Nandayasha, 70.185
**Jindatt** - Son of Dhanadesh and Ashokdatt, 72.245
**Jindatt** - Son of Seth Vrishabhadatt and Sethani Padmavati of Rajpur, 751315
**Jindatta** - Second wife of King Ahendas of Ayodhya, 59.278
**Jindatta** - Wife of King Arhdas of Singhapur, 70.5
**Jindatta** - A Hayika, 710206
**Jindatta** - Friend of Bandhuyasha, daughter of Jindev, 71.365
**Jindatta** - A Dhakk singer, 71.395
**Jindatta** - Wife of Ghandev Vaishya of Varanasi, 76.319
**Jindas** - Resident of Singhapur, 633272
**Jindasi** - Wife of Seth Ahendas of Rajgrihi, mother of Jambuswami, 76.37
**Jindeva** - Son of Dhandev and Nandayasha, 70.185
**Jindeva** - A Muni, 71.362
**Jindeva** - Father of Jindatta, 71.365
**Jindeva** - Son of Dhandev and Ashokdatt, 72.245
**Jinpal** - Son of Dhanadatt and Nandayasha, 70.185
**Jinmatikshanthi** - A Yapika, 71.438
**Jinsen** - Author of Mahapuran, 57.67
**Jinsen** - Guru of Gunabhadracharya, 747
**Jinsen** - Guru of Acharya Gunabhadra, 761528

Page #708:
---------------------------
680
Jivadharasandha and Kalindasena's daughter 70 354 Jivambar - a Muni Raja
75.184
Jisandhar Raja Satyanbar bore Vijaya Shani's son 75.250 Jaini - Rajagrihanagar's Vishvi
's wife 57.72
Jyestha Dhanadatta and Nandayasha's son 70 1186
Jyestha Raja Chetak's daughter 577 Jyotirmaala Meshavahan bore Meghamalini's daughter 62.72 Jyotirmaala Vidyutprabha's sister
62 180
Jyotirmaala Raja Puruval's
wife 71.311 Jyotishprabha - Ratra Kalasavar's Vidyudanshtr etc. five hundred sons, the youngest son
72.126
Jyotishprabha Triprishthanarayana and Swayamprabha's wife 62.153
Jvalanji - Radhanupurchkaval Nagar's Raja 62/30 [[ ]]
Taksak - a Shila 72.53 Tamrakarn - an elephant 63.158 Tamrachul - a Vyantardev 63.186
Tarak - Bhogavardhan Nagar's Raja Shridhar's son - this was Vindhyashakti's Jiva who is now Prati Narayan 58.91 Tilakchandrika - Shri Chandra's Sakhi Alakasundari's mother 75/444
Tilothama a Devi 63.126 Tilothama Chandramnagar's Raja Dhanapati's wife 75.391

Uttarapurana
Trunpingal - Podanpur's Raja Suyodhan's wife Atithi's brother 67 224
Triprishtha - Podanpur's Raja Prajapati and Rani Mrigavati's
son 62 90 Triprishtha - the upcoming eighth Narayan 76.489 Triprishtha - Bhagwan Shreyansanayak's main questioner 76.530 Trishtasht - Bhagwan Mahavira Swami's previous birth's Jiva 76.539 Vilasika a dancer 62 0429
[v]
Dandgarm this name's Madhucod's main minister 61.76 Datta - Bhagwan Chandraprabha's main Ganadhar 54.244 Damak - Vitashokpur's a Seth 71.362
Damavar - a Muni 62/402 Damavar a Charan Riddhisari Muni 63/6
Damavar Charan Riddhidhari a Muni 63.280 Damavar a Muni 70 36 Damitarri Shivamandir Nagar's Raja 62.434 Darshak - Alak Nagari's a Raja Vidyadhar 59.229 Dav - Yadava Paksha's a Raja 71.73
Dashkandhar - Ravana 68 425 Dashrath - Videhagat Varasdesh's Susimanagar's Raja Bhagwan Dharmanath's third previous birth's Jiva 61 03 Dashrath - Varanasi's Raja 67.148
Dashrath - Hemakachch's Raja 75.10

Dasanan Ravana Pulastya bore Meshadhi's Push 68.12 Dasasy - Ravana 68 2
Danaviry Bhagwan Supashrvanath's main questioner 76.530 Dantamati an Aryika bore Rani Ramdatta's Sambodhane ke liye Sihpur Bayi thi 59 199
Dantamati a Dharthika 59.212 Daruk - Sarvasamriddh Seth's servant 76.168
Darun Chatrapur's a Vyap 59/273 Dashrathi - Ram 68.423 Divitilak - Kanakpur's Raja Garudven and Rani Bhutiveena's son 63.166 Divyabal - Saketa's Raja 59.208
Dipshik Jyotipramnavar's Raja Sandhinna and his wife Balyani's son 62.242 Dirghadant - the upcoming second
Chakravarti 76 482 Durjay - Jarasangha's Paksha's a
Raja 71 80
Durdarshan - Putrastara Bir Baba's third son 70.117 Durdarshan - Jarasangha's Paksha's a Raja Kaurav 71.79 Durmukha - Ravana's Paksha's a Vidyadhar 68 431
Durmarshan Jarasangha Paksha's a Raja - Kaurav 71.79
Durmarshan - Vridhgram's a Grihastha
76 156
Duryodhan - Pritrastara and Ganbari's eldest son 70.117

Page #709:
---------------------------
Dushasana - The second son of Dhritarashtra and Gandhari 70.127 Dridgrahi - A king 65.62 Dridh Mitra - The king of Hemabhanagar 752421 Dridhmitra - The king of Nagar Shobha Nagar 75.438 Dridhpraharya - Dridhprahar - The king of Ujjain, a warrior of Vrishabhadhwaja 71.210 Dridhraksha - The son of Potpaka 75.103 Dridhastha - Rama, the Lord of Bhadrapur, the father of Shitalnath 56.24 Dridharatha - The son of Punurokini Garike Gaja Ganasya and Queen Manorama, the Jiva of Sahasrayudha 63.144 Dridharatha - The king of Bhadrailpur, the son of Mesh Ratha and Queen Subhadra 701183 Dridharatha - The wife of King Drupad 72.198 Dridhraj - The king of Shravasti, the father of Lord Sambhavnath 49.14 Dridhvarma - A Shravak 76:203 Devaki - The younger sister of Kansa 701369 Devaki - The daughter of King Devsen of Dashapur, born to Queen Dhandevi, the Jiva of Nandayasha 711292 Devakumar - The son of Sanatkumar Chakravarti 617118 Devakuru - The palki during the Tap Kalyanaka of Lord Nemnath 71.169 Devaguru - A Muni 621403 Devaguru - A Charan, a Riddhihari Muni 70.137 Devadatta - The son of Vasudev and Devaki 71.295 Devadatta - The name of Pradyumna 72.6 Devadatta - The palki of Lord Vimalnathji 59.40 Devapal - The son of Ghanadatta and Nandayasha 70.185 Devapal - The son of Vasudev and Devaki 71.295 Devapal - The upcoming twenty-third Tirthankar 76.480 Devputra - The upcoming sixth Tirthankar 76.478 Devmati - The wife of Damak Seth of Vitashokpur 71:361 Devsharma - The husband of Chitrasena 7573 Devsen - The son of Naravrushti Dhour Padmavati 70.100 Devsen - The king of Dashapur 71.292 Devsen - The son of Vijaymati and Jya 75.258 Devsena - The wife of a Yaksha Grihastha residing in Shaligram 71.39 Devli - A Vaishya of Shankhanagar 621494 Devila - The daughter of Damak Seth and Devmati Sethani of Vitashokpur 71.361 Devila - The wife of Vijay of Shalmaligram 71.446 Devila - The wife of King Chandradatt of Podanpur 72.204 Drupad - A king of the Yadava side 71174 Drapad - The king of Kampilya Nagari 72.198 Damasen - A Muni 70.207 Dramsen - A Muni with knowledge of Avadhi 71.268 681 Dumsena - A Muni with eleven Angas 76.525 Drona - A distinguished person on the side of Jarasandha 71177 Draupadi - The daughter of King Drupad and Queen Dridharatha, who married Arjun 72.198 Dwijati - A Tapas 72.42 Dwiprishtha - The son of Brahma and his wife Usha, born in Achalastok Nagar. This was the Jiva of Sushen. This is Narayan 58184 Dwiprishtha - The upcoming ninth Narayan 761489 Dwipayan - A Muni 72.180 Dwipayan - The Jiva of the upcoming twentieth Tirthankar 76.474 Dhananjay - The king of Maharatanpur 62.68 Dhananjay - The king of Hastinapur 70.160 Dhananjay - The king of Meghpur 712252 Dhanad - The son of King Mahipan of Pundarikinini Nagari 55118 Dhanadatta - A Seth of Bhadrailpur 70.184 Dhanadatta - The son of King Chetak 75.4 Dhanadatta - A resident of Rajpur 75.528 Dhanadatta (Raidatta) - A Seth of Rajagrihi 76.48 Dhandev - A Seth of Ujjayini 75.16 Dhandev - A Vaishya residing in Varanasi 76.319 Dhandevi - The wife of King Devsen of Dashapur 711292

Page #710:
---------------------------
682
Dhandevi - wife of Seth Subandhu of Champapur 72.243 Dhanapati - son of King Nandi of Ompur 53.12 Dhanapati - King of Dhanapatipur 6503 Dhanapati - King of Chandraab Nagar 75.391
Dhanpal - King of Ratnasanchyanagar, son of Mahabal 50.10 Dhanpal - son of Ghanadatta Bor Nandayasha 70 185
Dhanpal - a Shravak of Rajpur 75.258
Dhanbhadra - son of King Betka 75/4
Dhanmitra - King of Ratnapura, son of Padmotar 58.11. Dhanmitra - Rajaseth 59 221 Dhanbhitra - a Varshik of Vindhyapur Nagar 62.100 Dhanmitra - son of Sagarsain and Dhamit
Gatika 63.264 Dhanmitra - a Sala of Jeevandhar 75.430
Dhanmitra - wife of Seth Dhan of Ujjayini
Devaki 7696
Dhanmitra - wife of Kuveradatta 76.237
-
Dhanshri - daughter of King Bemit Vikram and Queen Banandmati of Nandanpur 63.13 Dhanshri - daughter of King Dhananjay and Queen Sabandhi of Meghpur 71.253
Dhanshri - daughter of Agnibhuti Bor Bala 72.230 Dhanshri - wife of King Shrishen of Champapur 75.82 Dhanshri - wife of Rajagruhi Dhanadatta Baith 76.48 Dhanya - a cart driver of Rakhapur 63.157

Uttarapurana
Dhanya - King of Gulmkhetpur
73|133
Dhanyapen - a King of Pataliputra where the first Bahar of Bhagwan Dharmanath took place 61.41 Dharan - King of Kaushambi - father of Bhagwan Pach 52.15 Dharnijata - a Brahmin of Chal Gram in Magadh country 62.325 Dharatmaja - Sita 68 312 Gharasuta Sita 68.207 Dharma - the chief Ganadhar of Bhagwan Vasupujya 58.44 Dharma - a Balabhadra in the Tirth of Bhagwan Vimalnath 59.63 Dharma - the fifteenth Tirthankar Dharmanath
6101
Dharma - a Muniraj 71.454 Dharmaja - Yudhisthir 72.261 Dharmaputra - the eldest son of Pandu and Kunti, whose other name is Yudhisthir 70.115 Dharmapriya - a Seth of Rajagruhi 76.124
Dharmamitra - gave the first Bahar to Bhagwan Kundhunayak 64.41
Dharmaviyam - the main questioner of Bhagwan Padmam 76/530 Dharmaruchi - a Muni 59.256 Dharmaruchi - son of Dhanadatta Bour Nandagan 701186 Dharmaruchi - a Muni 72/231 Dharmaruchi - a Muni 763 Dharmasheel - the other name of Surendradatt Seth of Vineeta Ayodhya
70/150
-
Dharmasinha - a Muni 70173 Dharmasen - a Muni 71.391

Dharmasen - a Muni who was the Dharak of Dapoorv 76.523
Dharmila - a Brahmin who was given the position of Shri Bhuvi Pratyagosh by King Singhan 59187 Dharan - son of Andhakavrishti and Subhadra
70.96
Dharana - the chief Naka of the Sangha of Bhagwan Shreyansanayak 57758 Dharini - wife of King Suryaprabha of Suyaprabhpur 70/28 Dharini - wife of King Purvir 70/94
Dharino - wife of King Garudayeka 75.303 Dharini - wife of Hariyal 76.263 Dharmikee - daughter of Math of Konambi and Sethani Subhadra 71.437
Dhumketu - a Dev, the Jeeva of King Kanakarath whose Khoka Madhupaharan was replaced by Pryumn 42247 Dhritarashtra - son of Dhyas Jar Subhadra 70.103 Dhriti - a Devi 54/169 Dhriti - a Devi 63.200 Pratisehen - son of King Jayasen and Queen Jayasena of Prithvi Nagar 48/59 Dhritishen - a Charan Rishi of Mandaramirik forest, Riddhi. Ghari Muni 6320 Dhritishen - a Muni 63.248 Dhritishen - son of King Dharyavarma of Singhapur 75281 Dhritishen - a Muni who was the Dharak of Daspoorv 76.522
Dhritishena - wife of King Garudaveg of Kanakpur 63.165
-
-
-

Page #711:
---------------------------
##  Personal Noun Dictionary
**683**

* **Tishvara-**  A woman from the Tishvara-Sthimita Sagar (Ocean of Stillness) 70.28
* **Dhristarjuna-** A king from the Yadava faction 71.75
* **Dhruvasena-** Son of King Shambara and Shrimati 71.0409
* **[N] Nakula-** Eldest son of Pandu and Madri 70.116
* **Nakula-** Son of Dhandevaki's second wife 75.110
* **Nakshatra-** A Muni (sage) who knows the eleven Angas (limbs of Jainism) 76.524
* **Nand-** A Gop (cowherd) who raised Krishna 70.389
* **Nand-** Son of King Gangadev and Queen Nandapasha 71.262
* **Nand-** Son of King Mandivardhan, a brave warrior from the city of Pauri and Veeravati 74.243
* **Nand-** A Yaksha (celestial being) 76.315
* **Nand-** A previous birth of Lord Mahavira 76.543
* **Nandaka-** The sword of Pradyumna 72.116
* **Nandan-** A king of Prabhakaripuri, located in the Vatsakavati country 62.75
* **Nandan-** A Muni (sage) 62.6409
* **Nandan-** A Muni (sage) named Nandan, located in Siddhakut 63.13
* **Nandan-** King of Nandapur 63.3334
* **Nandan-** The soul of the ninth Tirthankara (Jain prophet) 76.472
* **Nandabhupati-** King of Siddhartha Nagar, who gave the first support to Lord Shreyans 57.50
* **Mandayasha-** Wife of Dhanadatta Seth, from the city of Madrilpur 70.184
* **Nandayasha-** Wife of King Gangadev of Hastinapur 71.262
* **Nandayasha-** Daughter of King Vasava and Queen Vasundhari of Shwetvika, a soul without compassion 71.1283
* **Nanda-** Wife of King Vishnu of Singhapur, mother of Lord Shreyans 57.18
* **Nanda-** Wife of Radha Megha, from Bhadrailpur 71.304
* **Nanda-** Wife of Gandhotkat, a Vaishya (merchant) 75.1246
* **Nandan-** Son of Gandhotkat and Sunanda 75.261
* **Nandini-** Wife of Dhanadatta, a resident of Rajapur 75.528
* **Nandibhuti-** The fourth Narayana (Jain deity) 76.488
* **Nandimitra-** A Gop (cowherd) from Ayodhya 63.16
* **Nandimitra-** The second Narayana (Jain deity) 76.487
* **Nandavardhan-** Son of Megha and Priyamitra 63.148
* **Nandivardhan-** A Charan (bard) Muni (sage) with Riddhi (supernatural powers) 71.9403
* **Nandivardhan-** King of Chatrakarapur 74.242
* **Nandishen-** King of Kshemapur, in the Suruchch country 53.2
* **Nandishen-** Son of King Gangadev and Queen Vandayasha 63.263
* **Nandishen-** Son of Sagarsain and Amitagati 63.264
* **Nandishen-** A Balabhadra (Jain deity) 65.1174
* **Nandishen-** A king of Mithila, who gave the first offering to Lord Mallinath 
* **Nandishen-** The third Narayana (Jain deity) 76.487
* **Nandi-** Son of Somasharma, a Brahmin 70.201
* **Nandi-** The first Narayana (Jain deity) 76.487
* **Nandimitra-** A Shruta Kevali (Jain who has attained perfect knowledge) 76.519
* **Nandimuni-** A Shruta Kevali (Jain who has attained perfect knowledge) 76.519
* **Nandyaavart-** The palace of King Siddhartha 74.1254
* **Nami-** Son of Chhaka 62.93
* **Nami-** Son of Lord Adinath 67.175
* **Nami-** The twenty-first Tirthankara (Jain prophet) 69.1
* **Nami-** Son of Pavanaveg and Shyamasha 71.6370
* **Naradev-** King of Nagapur, in the Sarasamuchchay country 68.4
* **Narapati-** A king, the third previous birth of Lord Chakravarti 61.289
* **Narapati-** King of Talpur 67.34
* **Narapal-** A king 76.172
* **Naravrishabha-** King of Vitashoka Nagari 61.166
* **Naravrishti-** Son of Shuravir and Parini 70.194
* **Nalin-** The sixth Kulkar (Jain deity) 76.464
* **Nalinketook-** Son of King Vindhyasena and Queen Sulkshna, from Vindhyapur 63.100
* **Nalinadhwaj-** The ninth Kulkar (Jain deity) 76.465
* **Nalinpungav-** The tenth Kulkar (Jain deity) 76.465
* **Nalinpram-** King of Kshemapur, in the Kachchh country, located in Videha 57.13
* **Nalinpram-** The seventh Kulkar (Jain deity) 76.464

Page #712:
---------------------------
684
Uttarapurana
Nalinaraj - The upcoming eighth Tirthankara, Kunthunatha, the Kulakara 766465
Main questioner 761531 Nalina - The king of Hemananagar, Nikumm - A close friend of Ravana's wife 751421 Vidyadhar 68.430 Navamika - A goddess of Saudharmendra, Nidhoeshwar - The Nandishwar island 63.18
Kubera - A god named Kubera 72.33 Nagadatta - The treasurer of Ujjayini, Nipunamati - The Seth and Dhan Mitra Sethani's wet nurse of Queen Ramdatta 59.168 Putra - The soul of Mahabal 75.96 Nipunamati - A Nagadatta of Samudravijay, Sagaradatta and Prama - Chetak 701229 Karika's son 761218
Niranukamp - Yakshadatta and Yakshanagadatta - The son of Bhagwan Dharmanatha's Datta, the second Yaksha of the pass 61138
The prevalent name 710280 Nagavasu - The wife of Durmarshan
Nirnamak - King Gangadev and 76.156
The neglected son of Nandayasha, Nagshri - Agnibhuti and Agni - 7.265 Laki's daughter 726230
Nirnamak - A Muni 70.206 Nagshri - Durmarshan and Nagavasu
Nirmal - The daughter of the upcoming sixteenth Tirthankara 764156
Tirthankara 76.479 Nagi - Krishna's Susima Pattarani, Nivriti - The soul of Abhdra of Kshempur Nagar, the Seth's wife 75.410 Kar, Nagkumari became 71.393 Nivritta - A Yayika 70135 Nagendra - Sanjayant Devli's Nivriti - The brother of Bhagwan Padma Prabh's previous birth 59 128 Palki 52051 Nagendra - The soul of Marubhumi, Vajra - The elephant of Nishumbh, the ruler of Chakrapur 73320
The soul of Suketu, Pratinarayan. Naminandan - This Muni named Naminandan was killed by the Parana Riddhi Dhar Muni 62150, by the Punndarik Narayan 65.183 Narad - The famous Shalaka Purush, Nishkashay - The upcoming fourteenth Tirthankara 621430
Tirthankara 76.479 Narad - A disciple of Kshirakadamb, Neel - A Vidyadhar of Ram's side 67.259
68.621 Narad - A Padavidhar, a man, Neelkanth - The king of Alaka, Mayur 68.91
The son of Greev 62159 Narad - A Padavidhar, a man, Neelarath - The king of Jhalakar, Mayur 71167
The son of Greev 62059 Narad - A Padavidhar, a man, Neelvega - The wife of Mahendra Vikram, Krishna's friend 72166
63.106 Narad - The upcoming twenty-second Tirthankara, Neelanjana - The king of Akha, the soul of Kar 76.474
The wife of Mayur Greev 62.58
Nemi - The twenty-second Tirthankara, Neminatha 70.1 Naigam - A Dev 71121 Naigamarsh - A Dev 70.385
[P] Panchmukha - The corpse of Lakshman
68/676 Panchshar - Pradyumna 72.167 Panchasgreev - The son of Shatagrov 
68.10 Patangak - The son of King Chetak
755 Padma - The king of Saumanas Nagar, the first to give a garland to Bhagwan Sumatinath 51172 Padma - A Chakravarti 66.67 Pabh - The son of Vasudev, born from Rohini Nayak's wife, the soul of Shankh Muni, the ninth Balabhadra 70.318 Panna - A king of the Yadava side
71.74 Pa - The upcoming eleventh Kulakara
76465 Pan - The upcoming eighth Chakravarti
76.483 Padmagulm - The Susima of Vatsadesh
The king of Nagari 56.3 Pandevi - The daughter of King Vijaydev and Queen Devila of Shalmligaram 71.447 Pannadhwaj - The upcoming fourteenth Kulakara 766466 Panam - The son of King Kanak Prabh and Queen Kanakmala 54|131 Panam - Kanakprama's
54.144 Pajhnam - The son of King Panasen 598

Page #713:
---------------------------
##  Personal Noun Dictionary

**685** Padmanam - King of Varanasi
**6670** Padmanam - King of Bhogapura
**Padmapungav** - Fifteenth Kulakara
**761466** Papram - Sixth Tirthankara
**5211** Pachpram - Upcoming Twelfth Kulakara
**76.465** Padmarath - King of Meghpura
**62066** Padmarath - King of Hastinapura, son of Meghrath and Padmavati
**70.274** Padmaraj - Upcoming Thirteenth Kulakara
**76466** Padmakata - Daughter of Chakradhwaj and Kanakmalika
**621365** Palata - Son of King Mahabal and Queen Kanchanata, life of Kanaklata
**75.98** Pamalata - Daughter of Mahabal and Kanchanlata
**75.118** Padmashri - Daughter of Sagaradatt Seth and his wife Padmavati of Rajagrihi
**76.46** Padmsen - King of the great city of Ramyakavati country, related to the Videha region of Dhaatki Khand
**59.3** Padmavati - Daughter of King Chakradhwaj and Vidyumati of Vitashokpura
**62366** Padmavati - Daughter of King Upendrasen of Indrapura, who married Pundarik Narayan
**65.179** Padmavati - Wife of King Vasu of Shripura
**6975** Padmavati - Wife of Naravrushti
**701100** Padmavati - Wife of King Meghrath of Hastinapura
**70.274** Padmavati - Wife of King Hiranyavarma of Arishtapura
**70.307** Padmavati - Wife of King Ugraken of Prathura
**7.341** Padmavati - One of Krishna's queens
**71.127** Padmavati - Daughter of King Hiranyavarma and Queen Shrimati of Arishtapura
**71.458** Padmavati - Wife of Vrishabhadatta Seth of Rajpura
**75.315** Padmavati - Wife of Sagaradatt Seth of Rajagrihi
**76.46** Padmavatikshanthi - Padmavati's mother
**71.456** Padmottama - Daughter of King Dhanapati and Queen Tilottama of Chandraabh Nagar
**75.391** Padmottar - King of Ratnapura Nagar, related to the Vatsakavati country of Pushkaraddham Dwip
**5802** Parameshwar - Author of the Mahapurana, a collection of stories based on the Vagarth Sangrah Purana
**Prashasti.17** Parashar - Son of King Shakti and Queen Shataki of Hastinapura
**70.102** Parvat - Disciple of Kshirakadambak
**67.259** Pavanaveg - A Muni
**63.114** Pavanaveg - A Vidya of Vijayardh
**71.369** Pavanaveg - A Vidyadhar
**71.410** Pavanaveg - A Vidyadhar, King of Shivankaranagar
**75.164** Pavanaveg - A pigeon, life of Gunamitra
**75.457** Pavanavega - Wife of King Ashaniveg of Kinnaragit Nagar
**70.255** Pavnatmaj - Anuman - Hananad
**68.370** Panchal - Son of Draupadi
**2214** Pandav - The Yadava clan, 1. Yudhisthira, 2. Bhima, 3. Arjuna, 4. Sahadeva, 5. Nakula
**71174** Pandu - Son of Vyasa and Subhadra
**70.103** Pandu - A Muni, knower of eleven Shangas
**76.524** Parat - King of Kanyakubja
**65.58** Parshari - Wife of Shandilya Brahmana, resident of Rajagriha Nagar
**74.83** Parth - Third son of Pandu and Kunti, also known as Arjuna
**70.116** Parthiv - King of Kaushambi Nagar, a distant country of Bharatavarsha
**69.2** Parsvanath - Twenty-third Tirthankara, Lord Parsvanath
**73.1** Pihitastrav - A Tirthankara of Videha, who had taken the vow of Raksha Aparajita
**52.13** Pihitastrav - A Muni
**59.244** Pihitastrav - A Muni
**62177** Pihitastrav - A Muni
**626154** Pihitanov - A Muni
**63.139** Pundarik - A Narayan
**65.174** Putra - A Gan of Lord Mahavira
**74.373** Punarvasu - King of Barishta Nagar, the first to offer food to Lord Shitalnath
**56.47** Puru - Lord Rishabhdev
**73.122** Purudev - Lord Adinath
**63404**

Page #714:
---------------------------
## Translation:

**686**
**Uttarapurana**

**Pujaara** - Kipari - Puti Ka - Padhivar and Mandaki's king 71.311
- Dhivariki's daughter 71:326 Pururava - Madhu Sadanakah, a Bhil. Puran - Andhak Vrusti and Subhadra Raj 62.87
- Son of 7096 Pururava - Bhagaman Mahavir's Puritarthi Chch - Andhak Vrusti and
- Previous birth's Jiva 761534 Subhadra's son 70 96 Purushpundarika - Bhagavan Anant - Purnchandra - Ramdatta Rani's son, Nath's main questioner Mihachandra's younger brother 761531
59.192 Purushottama - Khajpur's Raja Purnchandra - a Muni 59.200 Soma Bhakti Rani Sita's Purnchandra - Podanpur's king, son 67:143
- Whom Hiranyavati married Purushottama - Bhagavan Vimalanath - 59:209
- Main questioner 76.530 Purnchandra - Varuni's Jiva Pulatya - Panchashadgrivaka 59.211 son 68.11
Purnchandra - Upcoming seventh Balpushpaka Adhipati - Ravana 68.428
Bhadra 766486 Pushpachul - Chandrachul and Mano. Purnmadar - Sakaet Barhaddaas Seth Hari's son 71252
- And his wife Vaprshri's Puppadatta - Sthunanagar Nagar's son - Agnibhutika Jiva Bharadwaj Brahman's wife 72.26 74/71
Prithvi - Dwaravati's king Bhadrapushpadant - Dhataki Khand's previous wife - Swayambhu Narayan's Bharat Kshetra related Ayodhya's king 5986 71.256
Prithvichandra - Lakshman's son Pushpadant - Rajpur's wealthy 681690 Malakar 756527
Prithvitilak - Shankh Baur Jaypushpadanta - Bhagavan Muni Suvrat - Devi's daughter - Namahaghosh's Nath's Sangha's main Ayika woman 63.177 67153
Prithvidevi - Lakshman's wife Pushpamitra - Shailpur's king, 68.47 where Bhagavan Pushpadant - Prithvishena - Varanasi's king's first Bahar Hupa was. Supratistha's Rani - Bhagavan 55148
Suparshvanath's mother 53119 Pushpamitra - Bharadwaj and Pushpa. Prithvi Sundari - Pama Pakravati's Datta Brahman couple's son, main daughter among eight daughters 74.71
6680 Pushpamitra - Bhagavan Mahavir's Prithvisundari - Lakshman's main
- Previous birth's Jiva 76.535 wife 68.666 Putana - Kansa's previous birth's one Prithvisundari - Videh Magar's Vidya 70.416.
- King Gopendra's wife 75.644
Prithvisundari - Rajaputri who married Pritingkar 76 347 Prithvi Sundari - Patna's king Shishupal's wife 76.398 Prakutaj - Bhagavan Ajitnath's
- Sangha's main Aryika 48.47 Prajapati - Suramyadesh - Podanpur
- King 62.90 Prajapati - Malaya Desh's Ratnapura Nagar's king 67490 Prajapati - Bhagavan Badinath
7317 Prajapati Maharaj - Ujjayini's
- King 75.95 Prajapal - Shripur Nagar's king
66.68 Prajavati - Mithila king Kumbh's wife - Bhagavan Mallinath's mother 6621 Pragyaptividya - a Vidya 72.78 Pradyumna - Shrikrishna's Rukmini
- Rani's born son 72.2 Prabhanjan - Vidyutkant Nagar's
- King - a Vidyadhar 68.276 Praman - Harivarsh Desh's Bhogapur
- King 70.74 Praman - King Chetak's son
7515 Pramankari - Ayodhya's king Vaj
- Bah's wife 73.43 Pramakari - Kaushambi's king Vijay's wife 69.79 Pramakari - Supratisthapur from Sagar
- Dat Seth's wife 76.217 . Pramavati - Puran's wife 70.99 Prabhavati - King Chetak's daughter
Prabhavega - Vidyumali Indra's
- Devi 76.33 Pramaas - Sindhu Gopura's Adhi. Sthata Pak Dev 68.653

Page #715:
---------------------------
## Personal Noun Dictionary
687
Prabhas - Lord Mahavira's. Priyamitra - Megha Rath's wife, Gandhar 741374
63.288 Pramaas - King Chetak's son, Priyamitra's - Preetikar's elder
mother 76.333 Prashastavanka - a Charan, Riddhi
Priyavak - Dharan's wife 70.99 Dhari Muni 751678
Preetikar - King of Chatrapur, Preeti. Prasenik - King of Vatsa Nagari, son of Bhadra and Queen Sundari 7571
son 59.255 Prastaravidya - a Vidya of Pradyumna. Preetikar - King of Singhapur, son of Ap 72.135
Rajit 70.48 Praharanavaran - a Vidya 62.271 Preetikar - a Muni 76.215..... Priyakarini - of Prithivitilakpur.
Preetikara - Sudatt's wife, King Ativeg's wife 59.241
63.101 Priyakarini - King Chetak's daughter, Preetikara - Sudatt's wife
Bandhumati - Nand Yasha's elder
sister 71.265 Bandhumati - Madhushen of Vijayapur
Vaishya's wife 71.364 Bandhuyasha - Madhushen and Bandhumati
's daughter 71664 Bandhushri - Devil of Shankhanagar
Vaishya's wife 621495 Babro - a dancer 621429 Bal - Suparshvanath's first Gan
house 53.46 Bal - Balaram 7176 Bal - the upcoming fifth Narayan
76.488 Baldev - the upcoming seventeenth Tirthankar
's Jeev 76.473 Bali - Minister of the King of Hastinapur
70 277 Balindra - King of Mandarpur Nagar, Vijaya - Jeev of the seventh minister 66.110 Balindra - King of Kilkilanagar
68272 Bahumitra - a Sala of Jeevandhar
75.429 Bahushrut - a minister of Jwalanajati
Priyankar - son of Preetikar
76.385 Priyangsundari - wife of King Balindra of Kalakil Nagar 680272 Priyadarshana - wife of Bajitsan
63.383 Priyadarshana - daughter of Ghanadatt and Nand
Yasha 701186 Priyadarshana - an Ayika 72135 Priyadarshana - Devi of Vidyumali Indra
76.33 Priyamitra - son of Madyavan Chakravarti
61999 Priyamitra - son of Dhanadatt and Nandayasha. 70.186 Priyamitra - an Avadhignyani
Muni 741223 Priyamitra - son of Sumit and Suvrata
741237 Priyamitra - Lord Mahavira's
Jeev of the previous birth 76.542 Priyamitra - wife of Mesharath
633147 Priyamitra - a Ganini-Bayika 636253
Preetikari - wife of King Pushpadant of Ayodhya 71.257 Preetimadr - 8: Puka King 59.254 Preetimathi - daughter of King
Arija and Queen Ajit. Sena of Arindampur 70.31 Premak - Jeev of the upcoming thirteenth Tirthankar
76.473 Protil - a Muni 70171 Proshthil - a Muni 740243 Proshthil - Jeev of the upcoming fourth Tirthankar
76 472 Proshthil - the upcoming ninth Tirthankar
76.478 Proshthik - a Muni, holder of Dashapurva 760521
Balanaya - son of Kalkiraj, Jeev
of Tanjaya's wife 76.428 Bahubali - son of Lord Adinath
62.93 Buddhaviya - Lord Pushpadant's
main questioner 761530 Buddharth - a Muni 71.417 Buddhi - a Devi 631200 Buddhil - a Muni, holder of Dashapurva
761522 Buddhishen - son of Sagar and Shrimati.
75.259 Buddhishena - a Ganika-Veshya of Saketapur 59.258
Phalgusena - the last Shravaka of Panchamkal 76.433
[B] Bandhmochan - a Vidya 62.271 Bandhumati - wife of Seth Shwetvahan of Hastinapur 711260

Page #716:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**688**
**Uttarapurana**

**Buddhisagar-raja** Mahapadmaka
**Mantri** 76.163 **Brahma-Dwaravati**'s Swami 58583 **Brahmadatt-Parahva** Chakravarti
72.287 **Brahma-Ayodhya**'s king, who first offered food after attaining diksha from Bhagwan Ajitanath 4841 **Brahma-Brahmadatt** Chakravarti's father
72.287 **Brahmi-Varanasi**'s king Vishvasen's wife - Bhagwan Parvanath's mother 73175
[B] **Bhagadatt** - a king on Jarasandh's side 71.80 **Bhagadatt** - son of Rashtrakut and Revati 76.153 **Bharli-Jhagami** 18th Tirthankara
**J.V** 76.474 **Bhagirath** - son of Sagar Chakravarti born from his wife Vidarbha 48.127 **Maharak-Bhagwan** Neminaath
72.271 **Mad-Dwaravati**'s king - father of Dharma Balbhadra 5971 **Bhadra-Ratnapur**'s chariot driver 63157 **Bhadrakheer-Nandimitra** and Datt's excellent elephant 66.110 **Bhadrabahu** - a Muni 59.211 **Bhadrabahu** - a Shruta Kevali
76.520 **Bhadramitra** - son of Padmakhetpur's Sudatt Seth and Sumitrasethani 59.148 **Madgamitra** Vanik - who later became Singhchandra 59.210
**Madra-Koshal** country's Saketa city's king Sumit's wife - Madhavan Chakravarti's mother 61192 **Maha-Podanpur**'s king Prajapati's wife 62.91 **Bhadra-Kaushambi**'s Vrishabhasen Seth's wife 75.56 **Bharat-Raja** Dasharatha's son 671165 **Mat-Bhagwan** Shantinath's son
74/75 **Bharat-Aagami** first Chakravarti 76.482 **Marat-Bhagwan** Adinath's assembly's chief questioner 76.529 **Bhav-Jambu Swami**'s chief disciple 76.120 **Bhavdev-Rashtrakut** and Revati's son 766153 **Bhanu-Ratnapurnagar**'s king, Bhagwan Dharmanath's father 61.14 **Bhanu-Kansa**'s brother-in-law Subhanu's son
70.448 **Bhanukirti-Seth** Bhanudatt's second son 712203 **Bhanukumara-Shrikrishna**'s Satyabhama Patrani's son 72.135 **Bhanudatt-Mathura**'s Seth
71.202 **Bhanushen-Seth** Bhanudatt's third son 71.203 **Bhanusur-Seth** Bhanudatt's fourth son 71.203 **Bhamarati-Raja** Satyandhar's wife 75254 **Bharadwaj-Sthunanagar** city's Brahmin 74/71 **Bharadwaj-Shalangayan** and Mandira's son 7479
**Bharadwaj-Bhagwan** Mahavira's previous birth's being 76.546 **Bhavit-Bhagwan** Kunthunath's Sangha's chief Ayika 64.49 **Bhaskar-Mahashukra** heaven's Bhaskar Vimana's Dev-Ramadatta's being 59.226 **Bheem-Singhapur** city's ruler 62205 **Bhimaka-Haribal**'s Dharini wife's son 76.264 **Bhimsen-Pandhu** and Kunti's middle son 70.116 **Meeshm-Jarasandh**'s side's king 7177 **Bhootraman-** a forest 75.43 **Bhoothit-Videha**'s Tirthankara 55.13 **Bhootanand-** a Tirthankara 711258 **Bhootilak-Malaka**'s resident
Vidhyadhar 76.263 **Bhootisharma-Bhadrailpur** city's Brahmin 5659 **Bhoodar-Dharanendra** 7311 **Bhoopala-Bharatkshetra**'s king 65.52 **Bhoobhoota-Sita** 681336 **Bheshaj-Kosala** city's king 71.342 **Bhogdev-Nagpur**'s king Nardev's son 685 **Bhogini-Padmavati** 73.1 **Bhogini-** a Vidya 75.436 **Bhramari-** a Vidya 62.278
[M] **Maghava-Kaushambi**'s king
7064 **Maghava-Bhagwan** Chandra Prabha's chief questioner 76530

Page #717:
---------------------------
## Personal Noun Lexicon

**Manoभव-PradyumnaKumar**

75.569 **Manorama** - A strong charioteer, bearded woman
63.144 **Manorama** - MeghaRath's wife
63.147 **Manorama** - SihaRath's wife
63.244 **Manoवेग** - A VidyaDhar
**Manoवेग** - King of SuvaPipu, in the southern region of VijayaKi
**Maghavan** - JimaRa Chakravarti 61.88
**Mangala** - Wife of MeghaRath, King of Ayodhya, mother of Bhagavan SumatiNath 51.120
**Mangini** - Chief Ayika of the Sangha in Bhagavan NamiNath's time 69.64
**MangI** - Wife of a hunter from Chatrapur 59.273
**MangI** - Daughter of VimalaChandra Seth and Vipala Thani of Ujjain, wife of Vain Mushti 71.211
**Manjarika** - A Duni of Gavana 68.321
**ManiKundala** - Son of Mukundali, King of AdinYa BhaNagar, born from his wife MitraSena 62.362
**ManiKetU** - Brother-in-law of JayaSen, a MahaRutuka Jiva, who became a Deva in Achyun Svarga 48.69
**ManiKetU** - A Deva, friend of King Sagara 481.9
**ManiChUla** - A Deva 67.146
**ManiChUla** - A Deva, Lakshmana's Jiva 67.152
**ManiVula** - Son of ChandraChUla and Manohari 71.6251
**ManiChUlaka** - Vijaya's Jiva, a Deva in the Swastika Vimana 62.411
**ManiChUla** - A Devi of PoshaM Draka 72.36
**ManiMadra** - Son of AhadSa and Vayashra, resident of Saketa, a VayuBhuta Jiva 72.26
**ManiMati** - Daughter of AmitVega, King of Sthalakapur 68.14
**Mandaki** - Wife of a fisherman named Matsya, from MandirGram 71.326
**Mandodari** - A Kalar from Kaushambi 70.347
**MatiVakSara** - Minister of King MeghaPath 56.66
**MatiSagara** - A Minister 62.217
**MatiSagara** - A Shravaka of Rajapur 75.257
**MatiSagara** - Minister of Gaja GarudVega 75.306
**Matsya** - A fisherman 71.1326
**MadanLata** - Wife of Ranga Nat, from Rajapur 75.1468
**MadanVega** - Daughter of Sendrotu and Suprabha, King of Vaswalaya 63.251
**Madhu** - King of Ratnapur 59.88
**Madhu** - Son of MahandaSa and Gani Kashyaga, King of Hastinapur, an AgniBhuta Jiva 72.39
**MadhuKrid** - Gaja of Hastinapur 61.174
**MadhuPingala** - A Kumar 67.158
**MadhuPingala** - Son of TrinaPingala and SarvayaSha 67.224
**MadhuMukha** - Son of MatiSagara and AnuPama 75.259
**Madhura** - Son of Raja SatPandhar, born from his wife BhaBharati 75.255
**Madhura** - Wife of MrigaYana Brahmana, who lived in an old village in the KoshaRa country 59.207
**MadhuVidvit** - Krishna 71.352
**MadhuShena** - A Vaishya of Vijayapur 71.364
**MadhuSudana** - A Pratinaraayana 67.143
**MadhuSudana** - Krishna 70.470
**ManoGati** - A messenger of Agriva 62.124
**ManoGati** - Son of SuryaPrabha, King of SuryaPrabhapur, and Queen Dharini 70.128
**ManoVega** - Son of PavanVega, King of Shivkar Nagar, and Queen Suvega 7.165
**ManoVega** - Wife of ManoVega, King of Suvarnabhapur 75.36
**Manohara** - A Gandharva Vidya Guru 70.262
**Manohara** - A lake in Krishna's inner palace 71.130
**Manohara** - Wife of GhanaRach, King of Pudari Kini Nagari 63.5143
**Manohara** - Chief wife of 7th JinDatt 75.321
**Manohari** - Wife of ChandraChur, King of NityaAlok Nagar 71.6250
**Mandara** - Chief Ganadhar of Bhagavan VimalaNath 59.48
**Mandara** - A Ganadhar of Bhagavan VimalaNath's Tirtha 59.108
**Mandara** - Son of AnantaVirya, King of Mathuga, and Queen Amitavati, a Dharanendra Jiva 59.3.3
**MandaraMalini** - Wife of DamitaRi 62.1500
**MandirSthavira** - A Muni residing in Sudarsana Van 70.187

Page #718:
---------------------------
690
Mandira - Wife of Salankayana of Mandirnagar 74.79
Mandodari - Nurse of King Sagar 67.217
Mandodari - Wife of Ravana 68.17
Mayurgreev - Resident of Alka 62/58
Marichi - One of the sons of Bharat Chakravarti 62.89
Marichi - Wife of Amitateja, King 62.269
Marichi - Son of Bharat Chakravarti and Rani Banantmat 74.851
Marichi - Being in a previous birth of Bhagwan Mahavir 76.534
Marubhuti - Son of Vishvabhuti and Anu 73.9
Markat - A Vyantar Dev 72.120
Mali - 19th Tirthankar Bhagwan Mallinath 66.1
Malli - First Ganghar of Bhagwan Munisuvrat 67.49
Mahati - Name of Bhagwan Mahavir 74.336

Sagar
Mahadadil - Previous Dev Paryaya of Mahabal Chakravarti 48.143
Mahakala - Being of Madhupingal, an Asura 67.252
Mahakala - A Rakshas Dev 72.111
Mahakalaasura - Being of Madhupingal 67.160
Mahachandra - Upcoming second Balabhadra 76.485
Mahajvala - A Vidya 62.273
Mahanand - A Dev of Yaksha Jatika 76.315
Mahapadma - Upcoming first Tirthankar, King of Shrenik 74/452
Mahapadma - King of Vitashoka Nagar in Videha Kshetra 76.130
Mahapadma - 16th Kulkar 76.466
Mahapadma - Upcoming first Tirthankar 76/477
Mahapadma - Upcoming 9th Chakravarti 76.483
Mahabal - Being of King Jayasen, a Dev 48.68
Mahaval - Master of Ratnasandhay Nagar in Mangalayati Desh 50/3
Mahaval - King of Ratnasandhayapur, 3rd previous birth of Bhagwan Abhinandanath 50/69
Mahabal - King of Kaushambi 62/351
Mahabal - Being of Vasur Ratnayush, an Asura 63.135
Mahabal - A Ganghar 67.119
Mahabal - Senapati of Sharath 67.463
Mahaval - A Kevali 69.13
Mahaval - Son of Suvarnavarma and Vilekha 75.181
Mahabal - Master of Palashnagar in Palashdweep 75.98
Mahabal - Upcoming 6th Narayan 76.488
Mahamukh - A Vidyadhar on Ravana's side 68.431
Maharath - King of Mahapur 58.80
Maharath - King of Sushimnagar in Vatsadesh, son of Dashrath 61.7
Maharut - Brother-in-law of King Jayasen 48.67

Mahavira - Name of the 24th Tirthankar 74.295
Mahaasen - Father of Chandra, King of Chandrapur 54.164
Mahaasen - Son of Chakravarti Harishen 67.84
Mahaasen - Son of Naravrushti and Padmavati 70.100
Mahaasen - Resident of Alka 76.263
Mahaasen - Main questioner of Bhagwan Parshvanath 76.532
Mahipadma - King of Pundarikininagar in Pushkalavati Desh 55/3
Mahipal - King of Mahipalpur, being of Kamath 73.97
Mahisut - Sita 68.374
Mahendra - King of Chandrapur 71.405
Mahendra - Muni residing in Dhan 72.27
Mahendradatt - King of Somset Nagar 53.43
Mahendravikrama - King of Kachan Tilk Nagar 63.106
Mahendravikrama - King of Nityalokpur 71.420
Maaksika Lakshita - A Vidya 71.371
Magadh - Main Pantar of Bharat Kshetra 62.146
Magadh - Dev who oversees the Lavana Sea 68.648
Mahi - Daughter of Andhakavrushti and Subhadra 70.97
Matri - Wife of King Mej of Kosala Nagar 71.342
Madhav - Krishna 71.429
Marich - A minister of Ravana 68.19

Page #719:
---------------------------
Vyaktivachak Shabdakosh
699
Makaṇḍeya-Siṃhaketu's Campā. Mṛgāyaṇa-Kauśala's native place.
A Brāhmaṇa residing in a village of 70.90, a friend of Nandī-Videha region's 59.207 king.
Mṛgāyaṇa-Sindhu river's bank, Mitramāva-Bhagavān Abhinandana's 70.142 ascetic's chief questioner, Mṛgāvatī-Podanapura's king Prajā. 76.529
Husband's wife 62.90 Maitravīra-Kauśāmbī's Vṛṣabhasena
Mṛgāvatī-King Cētaka's daughter, a servant of a Seṭha 75153
75.6 Mitravīrya-Bhagavān Sumatinātha- Harivikrima's servant, the chief questioner 76.529
75.480 Mitrasrī-Agnibhūti and Agni,
Meghināda-Gaganavallabha city's Lākī's daughter 72.230
King Meghavāhana and Queen Mitrasena-Sukuṇḍalī Vidyādhara- Meghamālinī's son-Ananta's wife 62.362
Vīrya Nārāyaṇa's jīva 63.30 Mitrasena-Hastināpura's King Meghināda-Bhadrila's a king
Sudarśana's wife-Bhagavān 71.454. Aranātha's mother 65.115 Meghamālinī-Gaganavallabha city's Mīnārya-Bhagavān Supāvanāya's
Queen Meghavāhana's wife, the chief preceptress of the Saṃgha 53.150 63.130 Muktadanta-the upcoming third Cakravartin- Meghamālinī-Hemāṃgada's wife 76.482
63.181 Muṇḍaśālāyana-Madrilpura's Bhūti Megharatha-Sāṃketa-Ayodhyā's a Śarmā Brāhmaṇa and his wife. Bhagavān Sumatinātha's Kamalā's son 71.304. his father 51.120 Munigupti-a Muni 75.90.. Megharatha-Malaya region's Bhadrila city's lord 56.64 59.231 -
Megharatha-Puṇḍarīkiṇī city's Munivara-a Muni 69.5
King Dhanaratha and Queen Manomunisuta-the upcoming eleventh Tīrthaṃkara's son-Banāyudha's jīva 76.479
63.143 Munisuta-the twentieth Tīrthaṃkara 67.41 Megharatha-Bhagavān Śāntinātha's Murāri-Kṛṣṇa 71.460
Previous life's jīva 63.388 Mṛkaṇḍū-Harivarṣa region's Bhogapura Megharatha-Bhadrila's King Magara's Queen Pramajana's wife 70.183 70.75
Megharatha-Hastināpura's King Mṛgacārī-a type of deluded 70.274 Muni 76.195
Megharatha-King Sudharma's son Mṛgaṃga-Kauśika ascetic and 71.273 Capalavegā's son-he was Kapila's son 62.380
71.6303
Meghavāhana-Surendrakāntāra city's
king 62.171 Meghavāhana-Gaganavallabha city's
king 63.29 Meghavāhana-Śivamandira city's
king 63.116 Meghavāhana-Jambūdvīpa Aṃgadeśa
Campāpurī's king 72.227 Meghavijaya-a king's elephant
59.249 Meghaśrī-Pulastya's wife 68.12 Meghasena-Megharatha's son 63.310 Meru-Vimala Bhagavān's
a Gaṇadhara 59.108 Meru-Mathurā's King Anantavīrya
and Queen Merumālinī's son 59.302. Merucandra-Vītaśokapura's king
71.439 Merumati-Puṣkalāvatī city's King Indragiri's wife 71.425 Merumālinī-Mathurā's King
Anantavīrya's wife 59.302 Maitreya-Bhagavān Mahāvīra's Gaṇadhara 74.373 Mauṇḍakauśika-Caṇḍakauśika and
Somaśrī's son 62.214 Maundrya-Bhagavān Mahāvīra's Gaṇa
dhara 74.373 Maurya-Bhagavān Mahāvīra's Gaṇadhara 74.373
[Ya] Yakṣa-Palāśakūṭa's Yakṣadatta householder, born to Yakṣadattā 71.279 Yakṣa-Śāligrāma's residing
a householder 71.390 Yakṣadatta-Palāśakūṭa's king 71.278

Page #720:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**692**
Yakshata - The queen of Palashkut King Yakshadatt 71.279
Pakshish - The residence of the Yakshas and the daughter of the Devarunas 71.390
Yakshamali - The Kirka king, Namika's maternal uncle 71.372
Yakshamitra - The brother of Shrichandra 75.491
Yakshil - The second son of Yakshadatt and Yakshadatta 71.279
Yakshil - The brother of Krishna in his previous birth, who became a Deva in the Mahashukra heaven 71.379
Yakshilla - A prominent official in the Sangha of Bhagwan Barnaath 65.43
Yakshi - A prominent official in the Sangha of Bhagwan Neminaath 71.186
Yativar - A Muni 60.366
Yativrishabha - A Muni 64.7
Yamadhar - A Muni 71.407
Yamunadatta - The wife of Bhanudatt Seth of Mathura 71.203
Yashaswati - The wife of King Vishvasen 63.414
Yashaswati - The wife of Hemam of Punnagpur 71.430
Yashaswati - An Aryika 75.32
Yashodhar - A Muni 48.67
Yashodhar - A Muni, who received initiation from Aparajit Balabhadra 63.26
Yashodhar - A Muni 70.154
Yashodhar - A Charanridvidhari Muni 71.420
Yashodhara - The daughter of Vaidury Deva, the wife of Shridhara 59.230
Yashodhara - The wife of Indradatt 63.92
Yashodhara - The wife of King Vajradant 76.140
Yasoabahu - A Muni of Acharang 76.525
Yasoabhadar - A Muni, a scholar of Prachararang 76.525
Yadav - Like Krishna, etc. 71.7
Yugandhar - A scholar of Videha, a Vara 58.17
Yuddhaviriya - A Vidya 62.971
[R]
Raghu - The son of King Maghava and Queen Vitashoka of Moshambi 70.64
Raghu - A friend of the king of Raghu-puram 70.179
Raghu - A Nat of Tejasrapur 75.467
Rati - A Devi of Kubera 63.16
Rati - A Devi 63.289
Ravivega - The Jiva of Anupama - a pigeon 75.457
Rati - The son of Jayamen and Queen Jayasena of Prithvinagar 48.59
Ratishen - The king of Pundikini Nagar, related to Punkalabani of Videhakshetra, the third previous birth Jiva of Bhagwan Sumatinayaka 51.3
Ratishena - A Devi 63.289
Ratnakant - The son of Ashva Privika 63.135
Ratnami - The son of Pradiy-Inkachitra 62.60
Ratnachud - The son of Ashvani Maur and Kanakachitra 62.60
Ratnatejas - A Seth of Rajpur 75.451
Namala - The daughter of King Ativega and Priyakarini, the wife of Vajrayudh - the Jiva of Shradhara 
Ratnamala - The wife of the 11th Tejas 75.451
Ratnarath - The son of Ashva and Banavachitra 62.60
Ratnavati - The daughter of King Gopendra and his wife Prithvisundari of Videha Nagar 75.644
Ratnasen - The king of Ratnapura 63.120
Ratnangad - The son of Greev and Kanakachitra 62.60
Ratnayudh - The son of Patrayudh and Ratnamala - the Jiva of Yashodhara Aavika 59.243
Ratnayudh - The son of Trayudh 59.246
Rasnayudh - The son of Aavoka 63.135
Raman - The son of Dhandev Vaidya and his wife Jindatta of Varanasi 76.319
Rambha - A Devi 63.136
Ravikiti - The commander of Ravana's army 68.531
Ravichul - A Deva, the son of Amitneja Vidyadhar, born in the 18th Swayam Nayavart Vimana 62.410
Rashmivega - The son of Surya and Yashodhara, the Jiva of King Sihasen, who became a Deva in the Shri heaven 59.231
Rashmivega - The son of King Vijay of Podanpur 62.275
Rashmivega - The son of Vidyutmala, the wife of King Vidyudgati Vidyadhar of Trilokottam Nagar

Page #721:
---------------------------
## Proper Noun Glossary

**Person/Character:**

* **Vajraghosha:** A being (Jiva) who was an elephant. 73.26
* **Rasaayanapaaka-Singhapur:** The owner of Rasaayanapaaka-Singhapur.
* **Kumbha:** A cook. 62.206
* **Raakshasa-Palaashapur:** The king of Raakshasa-Palaashapur.
* **Raaghava-Raamachandra:** 68.424
* **Raaghavanuja-Lakshmana:** 68.1645
* **Raajagupta-Shankhapur:** The king of Raajagupta-Shankhapur.
* **Raajasingha:** A king who defeated King Sumitra of Raajagruha. 61.59
* **Raajimati:** The daughter of King Ugrasen and Queen Jayaavati, whose marriage to Lord Neminaath was destined. 71.145
* **Raatrisheena:** The chief Ayika (female monk) among the five Ayikas of the Supreme Lord. 52.163
* **Raadhaa:** The wife of the king of Champaapur. 70.113
* **Raama-Balabhadra:** 57.197
* **Raama-Prasthama Balabhadra:** 67.189
* **Raama:** The son of King Dasharath of Vaaraanaasi and Queen Subala. 67.150
* **Raamadattaa:** The wife of King Singhasen of Singhapur. 59.146
* **Raamadattaa:** The daughter of King Poornachandra of Podanapur and Hiranyavati. This was a Madhuraaha Jiva. 59.210
* **Raavana:** The king of Lanka. 67.177
* **Raavananuja-Vibhishana:** 68.636
* **Rashtrakoota:** A Vaishya (merchant) from Pagrram. 76.153
* **Rukmini:** One of Krishna's wives. 71.126
* **Rukmi:** A king who was on Jarasandha's side. 71.78
* **Rudra:** The king of Ayodhya city in Sukoushal country. 71.1416
* **Rudradatt:** A Brahmin from Vineeta city. 70.152
* **Rudradatt:** The Purohita (priest) of King Satyandhar. 75.190
* **Roopashri:** The son of Dhanadatt Seth and Dhanshri of Raajagruhi. 76.48
* **Renuki:** A younger daughter of King Parat. 65.490
* **Ranvati:** The wife of Nandayasha. 71.264
* **Revati:** The wife of a Rashtrakoota Vaishya from Vridhhagraam. 76.152
* **Revaa:** The upcoming fifteenth Tirthankara (Jina) or Jiva. 76.6473
* **Rohini:** The daughter of King Hiranyavarman of Arishtapur and Queen Padmavati. 70.307
* **Rohini:** The goddess of the moon.
* **Lakshmimati:** The wife of a Soma Brahmin from Lakshmigraam. 71.317
* **Lakshmimati:** The wife of Vajrayudha. 63.44
* **Lakshmimati:** The wife of King Varensen of Chakrapur. 65.177
* **Lalitaanga:** A cunning trickster. 76.94
* **Lalitaangad:** The king of Tripura. 62.67
* **Lokapaal:** The brother of Padmavati. 75.400
* **Lokasan:** A disciple of Gunabhadra. Prasasti.28
* **Lokaaditya:** The king of Vanavaas. Prasasti.32
* **Loh:** A Muni (monk) who was knowledgeable about Praachaaraanga. 76.526
* **Lohjanga:** The son of Harivkram and a friend of the king of Van. 75.4481
* **Lakshmana:** The eighth Narayana. 67.589
* **Lakshmana:** The wife of King Mahaseen of Chandrapur. She was the mother of Lord Chandra Prabha. 54.164
* **Lakshmana:** The wife of Visakhaabhuuti. 57.173
* **Lakshmana:** One of Krishna's wives. 71.126
* **Lakshmana:** The daughter of King Shambar of Suprakaarpur and Queen Shrimati. She was one of Krishna's wives. 71.441
* **Lakshmana:** The wife of Visakhaabhuuti, the younger brother of King Vishvabhuuti of Raajagruha. 74.188
* **Vakul:** The son born to the king of Satyandhar from his Banangpataaka wife. 75.2255
* **Vajra:** A Vaishya from the city of Pundarikaarani. 71.366
* **Vajrakantha:** The son of King Mayuragreeva of Lanka. 62.09
* **Vajraghosha:** An elephant. 73.12
* **Vajrachaap:** The king of Vasvalaya. 70.76
* **Vajrachaamar:** The chief Ganadhar of Lord Padma Prabha. 52.058
* **Vajratunda:** A rooster from Kaanchaana. 63.152
* **Vajradant:** A great Muni. 59.248
* **Vajradant:** The king of Pundarikaarani city in Pushkalavati country. 76.3139

**Place:**

* **Rasaayanapaaka-Singhapur:** A city.
* **Raakshasa-Palaashapur:** A city.
* **Raajagruha:** A city.
* **Champaapur:** A city.
* **Vaaraanaasi:** A city.
* **Singhapur:** A city.
* **Podan

Page #722:
---------------------------
## English Translation:

**King Vajraviriya and Queen Vijaya of Ashvapura**
73.32 **Vajraबाहु** - King of Ayodhya, located in Kaushaladesh
73.42 **Vatramalini** - Wife of King Vajrangad of Tripuranagar
63.15 **Vajramali** - A Vidyadhar
70.104 **Vajramusti** - A wrestler of King Sihasen
59.175 **Vajramusti** - Strong striker (Dridhaprahar)
71.210 **Vajraviriya** - Son of Vaprādhi, King of Ashvapura, located in Padmadeśa of Videhakshetra, related to Jambudvipa
73.132 **Vajrasen** - A king of Saketa Nagar
74.231 **Vajrangad** - King of Tripuranagar, a Vidyadhar
63.15 **Vajrayudha** - Son of King Aparajit and Queen Chitramala of Chaṛpur - This was a Rashmivega being
59.240 **Vajrayudha** - Son of Chakraayudha
59.245 **Vajrayudha** - Son of King Kshemankar and Queen Kanakchitra of Ratnasamchay Nagar
63.139 **Vatavriksh** - Servant of Harivikram
75.3480 **Vanamala** - Wife of Seth Sumukh of Kaushambi
70.167 **Vanamala** - Wife of King Mahapadma of Vitashoka Nagar
76. **Uttarapurana** **Vaprashri** - Wife of Bahadās Seth of Saketa
72.26 **Vappila** - Wife of King Vijay Maharaj of Mithila, mother of Bhagwan Naminath
69.25 **Varachandra** - Son of Bhagwan Chandra Prabha
54.213 **Varachandra** - The upcoming sixth Bal, Bhadra
76.6486 **Varacharma** - A Vali of Kesh
69.75 **Varatanu** - A Dev, the guardian of the Vaijayant Gopura
68.4651 **Varadatta** - Son of Bhagirath, son of Sagar Chakravarti
48.138 **Varadatta** - A Devli
69.88 **Varadatta** - A king who gave the first meal to Bhagwan Neminath in Muni Atrastha
71.175 **Varadatta** - The main Ganadhar of Bhagwan Neminath
71.0182 **Varadatta** - Ganadhar of Bhagwan Neminay
72.12 **Varadatta** - Son of Dhanpal and Shridatta
75.259 **Varadharma** - A Muni
59.189 **Varadharma** - A Charan Muni, Riddhihari
62.73 **Varadharma** - A Muni located in the cremation ground of Ujjain
71.217 **Varadharma** - A Muni
71.6310 **Varadharma Yati** - A Muni
75.674 **Varasen** - Son of Dridharath and Sumatika
63.3148 **Varasen** - A Rajputra
63.1162 **Varasen** - King of Chakrpur
65.176 **Varasen** - Son of Mahaasen and Sundari
76.265 **Varun** - The one who gave knowledge of the cause of Kansa
70.412 **Varuna** - Wife of Kamath
73.10 **Varunay** - A Muni
72.235 **Vardhaman** - Bhagwan Mahavira
74.1 **Vasantasena** - Daughter of Samudraasen and Jayasena
63.119 **Vasantasena** - A Veshya of Champapur
7.258 **Vasishtha** - A Tapas, the master of Jatharkaushik Basti
70.323 **Vas** - Son of King Vishwavasu and Shrimati
67.257 **Vasugiri** - Descendant of King Markandeya of Champapur
70.92 **Vasudeva** - Son of Andhakavrishti and Subhadra
70.97 **Vasudevasut** - Shrikrishna
71.689 **Vasudha** - Wife of King Janak of Mithila
68.027 **Vasundhar** - King of Shripur Nagar, located in Airavat Kshetra
69.74 **Vasundharkumar** - Son of Jeevandhar, born from Gandharvadatta
75.1681 **Vasundhara** - Wife of King Stimit Sagar of Prabhakari Shuri
62.413 **Vasundhara** - Wife of King Sumitra
75.1439 **Vasundhara** - Daughter of Mahaasen and Sundari
76.265 **Vasundhara** - The girl who remained mute and was married to Pritikar
76.6347 **Vasundhari** - Wife of King Vasav of Shwetvika
71.2283 **Vasundhari** - Wife of Arvind
73.10 **Vanraj** - Son of King of Bhilok, Harivikram
75.480 **Vaprashri** - Wife of Dridhaprahar (Dridhaprahar)
71.210

Page #723:
---------------------------
## Person Name Glossary

**695**

* **Vasupujya:** Father of Lord Vasupujya (58.1)
* **Vasumati:** King of Aristapur
* **Vasavaki:** Wife of Vasumitra (71.361)
* **Vasumitra:** Husband of Devila (71.361)
* **Vagali:** 19th Tirthankara (76.474)
* **Vayu-bhuuti:** Son of Somadev and Agni, a Brahmin couple (72.14)
* **Vayu-bhuuti:** Ganadhara of Lord Mahavira (74.1373)
* **Vayu-vega:** Son of Indradatta and Yasho-shara (63.92)
* **Vayu-vega:** Son of Ramchandra and Queen Subhadra of Dyuutilakapar Nagar (62.37)
* **Vayu-vega:** Husband of Jwalanajati (74.134)
* **Varuni:** Daughter of Mrigaayan Brahmin and Madhura Brahmani of Vridh-gram (59.208)
* **Vali:** Son of Balindra and Priyang-sundari (68.273)
* **Basav:** King of Shwetavica Nagar (71.283)
* **Basav:** King of Kundalpur in Vidarbha (71.341)
* **Basav:** King of Aristapur (71.400)
* **Vasudeva:** Krishna (71.163)
* **Vasudeva:** 16th Tirthankara (76.473)
* **Vasupujya:** 12th Tirthankara (61.489)
* **Vichitra-chula:** A Dev (63.249)
* **Vichitra-mati:** Son of Mantri Chitra-mati and his wife Kamala (59.256)
* **Vichitra-vahama:** 10th Chakravarti (76.484)
* **Vijay:** Son of Raja Prajapati and his wife Jayavati of Podanpur (57.86)
* **Vijay:** Son of Raja Prajapati and his wife Bhadra of Podanpur (62.92)
* **Vijay:** Son of Abhayghosh and Queen Suvarna-tilaka of Tilaka Nagar (63.169)
* **Vijay:** Son of Lord Munisuvrat (67.139)
* **Vijay:** Son of Mantri of Raja Prajapati of Ratnapur (67.491)
* **Vijay:** A Dev (67.146)
* **Vijay:** A Vidyadhara (68.6390)
* **Vijay:** King of Kaushambi Nagar in Vatsadesh (69.79)
* **Vijay:** Son of Andhakavrishti and Sumudra (70.96)
* **Vijay:** A king of the Yadava clan (71.173)
* **Vijay:** A king of Ujjayini (71.443)
* **Vijay:** A Charan Muni, holder of Riddhi (74.282)
* **Vijay:** 21st Tirthankara (76.480)
* **Vijay:** A Muni, holder of Dasha-purva (76.522)
* **Vijay:** Main questioner of Lord Naminath (76.532)
* **Vijaygiri:** A hand of Greevandhara (75.1382)
* **Vijayghosh:** Name of a Shahw of Pradyumna (72.110)
* **Vijaydev:** King of Salmali Gram in Magadhdesh (71.446)
* **Vijayanandan:** King of Vijayapur (71.4)
* **Vijayparvat:** Elephant of Sakshamna (68.46)
* **Vijaymadra:** Son of Nandan, king of Prabhakaripuri (62.176)
* **Vijaybhadra:** Son of Triprishthanarayana and Swayamprabha (62.153)
* **Vijaybhadra:** Second son of Vijay Balabhadra (62.166)
* **Vijaymati:** A Shravak of Rajapur (75.256)
* **Vijaymaharaj:** King of Mithila (69.19)
* **Vijayram:** Son of Ramchandra (68.690)
* **Vijaysena:** Queen of Raja Jitshatru of Saketa-Ayodhya, mother of Lord Ajitanath (48.22)
* **Vijaya:** Queen of Raja Singh Sen of Khagpur (51.70)
* **Vijaya:** Wife of Aparajit Balmadra (63.14)
* **Vijaya:** Palaki of Lord Kunthunath (64.38)
* **Vijaya:** Wife of Raja Vajra-virya of Ashvapura (73.32)
* **Vijaya:** Wife of Raja Satyandhara (75.189)
* **Vijayi:** A resident of Banuttar named Vijay (76.55)
* **Ahmindra:** A previous birth of Lord Abhinandanath (50.69)
* **Vidarbha:** Chief Ganadhara of Lord Pushpadanta (55.152)
* **Vidur:** Son of Vyasa and Subhadra (70.103)
* **Vidur:** A king of the Yadava clan (71.76)
* **Vidyucchaur:** Son of Raja Vidyu-raj of Podanpur, known as 'Vidyucchaur' (76.55)

Page #724:
---------------------------
696 Vidhyudgati-Trilokottama Navar.
The king, a Vidyadhar 73.26 Vidhyubam-Meshavahan and Mesha.
Malinika's son 6272 Vidhyatprama-Poinpur's king Vidhyudab's son 7653 Vidhyama-Shrishen Raja's Singhnandita Rani's life, in the Soudharm heaven's Shrinilaaya Vimana, became a Devi 62.375 Vidhyudansh-K Drisht Vidyadhar
59.117 Vidhyudansh-Nanaki's brother
62.503 Vidhyudansh-Alaka's king
630241 Vidhyudansh-Raja Kalasanvar's five hundred sons, the chief son 72.85 Vidhyudveg-Gaganavallabh Nagar's
king 715419 Vidhyudvega-Gaganavallabh Nagar's
king Vidhyudvaig's wife 711420 Vidhyudvega-Vidhyumali Indra's
Devi 76.33 Vidhyudraj-Suramyadesh's Podan
Pur's king 76.53 Vidhyumati-Vitashok Nagar's king Chakravatra's second wife 621366 Vidhyumala-Vasvalaya's king Vajrapap Bor Rani Subhadra's daughter-Vanmaka's life 70.77 Vidhyumala-Vidhyudgati's wife
73.27 Vidhyumali-Hmastraganka Indra 76.32
Uttara Puranam Vichullata-Gunamala's Kasi
75.352 Vidhyullekha-Kantpur's king
Suvarnavarma's wife 7281 Vinami-Bhagavan Badinayake's
brother's son Vinayandhar-Shrepur's king
Vasundhar's son 69.76 Vinayandhar-a Muniraj
72.154 Vinayandhar-a Muni 750412 Vinayavati-Rajagruhi's Vaidhan-Datt Seth's wife 76147 Vinayashri-Ayodhya's king
Rudra's wife 71.417 Vinayashri-Ujwapini's king Vijay and Rani Bapra. Jita's daughter-Hastishipapur's king Harishen's wife 71444 Vinayashri-Rajagruham's Vaishravan. Datt Meth and Vinayavati's daughter 76.48 Vindhyashaki-Malayadesh's Vindhyapur's Gaya 5863 Vindhyasen-Gandhar Desh's Vidhyapur Nagar's king
Vimisham-Ahahhas and Jinitta's son-Ratnayush's wife 59278 Vimisham-Narayan's life in the second Prithvi 59.281 Vimisham-Ravan's brother
68||392 Vimal-thirteenth Tirthankar Vimal
Nath 5961 Vimal-upcoming twenty-second Tirth
kar 76.480 Vimalakirti-Videhakshetragata Kachchh Desh Sambandhi Kshempur Magar's king Vimalvahan's son 4967 Vimalchandra-Jjanka Seth
71.211 Vimalprama-Raja Shrishen's wife
Anindita Soudharm heaven's Vimalprabha Vimana, became a Devi named Vimalprama 621377 Vimalprabha-a Muni 63.121 Vimalprama-a Muni 72.4. Vimalprama-Bhagavan Shreyans
Nath's palki 57147 Vimalmati-a Muni 62.407 Vimalmati-a Gamini
633124 Vimalvati-Podanpur's king
Vidhyudvaj's wife 76154 Vimalvahan-Vatsadesh's Su.
Simanagar's king 48.4 Vimalvahan-Bhagavan .Ajitnap's life-Susimanagar.
's king 48154 Vimalvahan-Videh Sambandhi Kachchh Desh's Ksheppur Nagar's
king 49.2 Vimalvahan-a Muni 50.11 Vimalvahan-thirteenth Tirthankar Vimalnath 59.22
Vipul-upcoming fifteenth Tirth
kar 76.479 Vipulmati-a Paran Riddhi
dhari Muni 62.169 Vipuramti-a Muni 621407 Vipulmati-a Muniraj
73.45 Vipulmati-a Charan Riddhi
dhaage Muni 75.308 Vipulmati-Pakcharan Riddhi
dhari Muni 76.270 Vipulmati-a Charan Riddhidhari Muni 76.351

Page #725:
---------------------------
## Person Names

**Vimala**

* Vimala Vahan - A Tirthankara from Videha Kshetra (70.12)
* Vimala Vahan - A Muni (72.43)
* Vimala Vahan - King of Sammapura, son of Shweta Vahan (76.9)
* Vimala Vahan - The eleventh future Chakravarti (76.484)
* Vimala Shri - Son of Shrivar and Rani Shrimati, King of Jayanpura (716453-454)
* Vimala - Wife of Meghnad, ruler of Bhadillpur (716453-454)
* Vimala - Foster mother of Bhayan Chandraprabha (54.215)
* Vimala - Wife of Meghvahan (63.116)
* Vimala - Wife of Vimala Chandra, a Seth of Ujjain (711211)
* Vimala - Goddess of Saudharma heaven, wife of Indra (72.951)
* Vimala - Foster mother of Lord Parshvanath (73.127)
* Vimala - Adopted wife of Kumar Dutt, a Seth of Rajpur (75.351)
* Vimala - Daughter of Sagar Dutt, a Seth of Rajpur (751587)

**Virat**

* Virat - King of the Yadava clan (71/75)
* Virat - King of Virat Nagar (72.216)

**Vishakha**

* Vishakha - Chief Ganadhar of Lord Mallinath (6650)
* Vishakhanandi - Son of Vishakhabhuti and Lakshmana (57.73)
* Vishakhanandi - Son of Vishakhabhuti and Lakshmana (74188)
* Vishakhabhuti - Younger brother of Vishvabhuti (57174)
* Vishakhabhuti - Younger brother of Vishvabhuti (74.88)
* Vishakhaarya - A Muni, one of the ten previous Dharakas (761521)

**Vishala**

* Vishala - Wife of Mrigaayan Tapas, a resident of Sindhu Nir (70.142)

**Vishva**

* Vishvadev - King of Ratna Sanchay Nagar, Mangalavati Desh (711387)
* Vishvanandi - Son of Vishvabhuti and Jaigo (57172)
* Vishvanandi - Son of Vishvabhuti and Rani Ji, King of Rajgriha Nagar (74.87)
* Vishvanandi - A being in the previous birth of Lord Mahavira (76.538)
* Vishvabh - Minister of King Sagar (67.218)
* Vishvabhuti - King of Rajgrihi (57174)
* Vishvabhuti - A Brahmin of Podanpur (738)
* Vishvabhumi - King of Rajgriha Nagar (7486)

**Visen**

* Visen - Son of Ajit Sen and Priyadarshana (63.383)
* Vishvasen - King of Varanasi Nagar, Videha Kshetra, Jambudvipa (73175)
* Vishvavasu - King of Swatika Vaji (674257)

**Vishnu**

* Vishnu - King of Singhpur, father of Lord Shreyansnath (70.66)

**Veer**

* Veerdatt - A Seth of Dantapur Nagar, Kalinga Desh (70.66)
* Veernandi - A Muni (75.281)
* Veerbhadra - A Charan Muni, a possessor of Riddhi (70.324)
* Veeravati - Wife of Nandivardhan, King of Chatrakarpur (74/243)
* Veersen - Lord Mahavira (7303)
* Veersen - Guru of Jinsen (761528)
* Veeraangaj - A Muni, disciple of Chandracharya, the last Muni of the fifth Kal (76.432)

**Vrusham**

* Vrusham - A chariot (72.111)
* Vrushabhadatta - A Seth (74.340)
* Vrushabhadatta - A Seth of Rajpur (75.314)
* Vrushamadhwaj - King of Vishala Ujjain (712209)
* Vrushabhasen - The first person to offer food to Lord Munisuvratnath (67.45)
* Vrushabhasen - A Seth of Kaushambi (75.52)
* Vrushasen - A king on the side of Jarasandha (7178)

**Vaijayant**

* Vaijayant - King of Vitashoka Nagar, Gandhamalini Desh (59.110)
* Vaijayant - Son of Sajayant (59.112)
* Vaijayanti - Foster mother of Lord Aranay (65133)
* Vaijayanti - Wife of Varasen, King of Bakrapur (65.177)

**Vaidury**

* Vaidury - A Dev of the Vaidury Vimana in Mahashukra heaven, the being of Purnachandra (59.226)

**Vairochan**

* Vairochan - Dev of the Asura Kumaras (71:42)

**Vishnu**

* Vishnu - Son of King Meghrath and Rani Padmavati, King of Hastinapur (70.274)
* Vishnu - Krishna (72.181)

**Vitmaya**

* Vitmaya - Son of Ahdaddas and Suvata, the being of Ratnamala (59.278)

**Vitashoka**

* Vitashoka - Wife of King Maghava, Kaushambi (7064)

Page #726:
---------------------------
Shivagupta - a Muni 48.139 Shivagupta - a Muniraj who received initiation from Sanatkumar Chakravarti 61.118 Shivpush - a Tirthankara of Videha
Uttarapurana Vashravana - Jambudvipa related Kachchh - Shatabindu - Raja Sahasrabahu of Kavati country's Vitashokapura's Kaha 6551 Raja 662
Shatanik - King of Kaushambi Vaishravana - a Seth 70 174 7549 Shriyan - a Seth of Rajpura Shatrughna - son of Raja Dasharath 75. 48
67.165 Vaishravandatta - a Seth of Rajagriha Shatrughna - Vasudeva, elder son of Devaki 76147
son 71.296 Vordak - a servant of Abhaykumar's Shatrumardan - Harivikram
artificial disguise merchant 75121 75481 Vyasa - Parasharmitri Satyavati Shambhav - Kridav's life - son of Krishna 70.103
of Jambavati Rani's born [Sh]
son 721174
Shambhar - King of Sudhkar Nagar Shakti - King of Hastinapur
715409 70.102
Shambhar - a Jyotish Dev of Kamath Shakkhin - a Rajputra 63.162
73.117 Shankh - King of Mandar Nagar
Shalya - a king on Jarasandha's side 71178 Sh-5k Muni 70.206
Shashank - the upcoming eleventh Tirthankara Shak - Shwetavahna and Bandhupati
life of Karaka 76.473 son - life of Subhanu
Shaandilya - elder brother of Chitramati 711261
a Tapas 654115 Shankh - the upcoming eighth Tirthankara.
Shaandilya - a Vedagya life of Rajagriha 76 472
Brahman 74183 Shallika - King of the city of Raja
Shantav - wife of Ghandev and Gupta of Varanapi 631246
son of Jinadata 76.319 Sh-ki - Shakti, King of Hastinapur Shanti - sixteenth Tirthankara Shanti. wife of 70.102
Nay 621 Shatagriva - son of Sahasragriva Shantimati - daughter of Vayuveg and
Sukanta 63 94 Shataghop - son of Ashanighosh Sha - Lakshmana's bow 68.676
Shangadhar - Krishna 71968 Shatabali - son of Sahasra.yuva Shalankayan - a Brahman 74078 631138
Shalmalidatta - King of Kinnar Nagar Shatabali - son of Balindra
Bashivega and Rani 66.197
daughter of Pavanvega 701255 Shatabindu - on behalf of Ashvagriva. Shiv Kumar - a Vit. Gyan of Videha region 62.61
King of Shok Nagar Mahapan Shatabindu - on behalf of Ashvagriva - and son of Rani Vanmala Gyan 62.115
766131
Shivagupta - a Muniraj 66.105 Shivagupta - a Vavali 685708 Shivagupta - a Muniraj 75.78 Shivdosh - a Muni 65.190 Shivghosh - a Muni 68.468 Shivdevi - wife of Raja Samudravijay of Dwaravati - mother of Bhagwan Nemnath 71.30 Shivbhuti - son born from the wife of Brahman of Agnimitra 7572 .. Shishupal - King of Kosala city Bhaishaj and Gani Madre. son of 71.342 Shishupal - King of Patna
76.398 Sheetal - tenth Tirthankara Shetalnath 561 Shita - wife of Achal 70.99 Shil Gupta - a Muni near Rajpura 75198 Shildatta - a Muni 75 100 Shildatta - a Muni 75.138 Shilvati - wife of Raja Vajan of Saketa Nagar 74॥231 Shuklaprama - Satyabhama Brahmani's Javi - Vimala Prabh became a Devi in the Vimana 62.376 Shuma - daughter of a Brahman of Rajagriha 74.455 Shurdeva - fifth son of Seth Bhanudatta 71.204 Shuravir - son of Raja Sursena of Shourya Pura 7093 Shuravir - brother-in-law of Khadirsar Bhil 74/401

Page #727:
---------------------------
##  Proper Noun Glossary

**Shurasen:** King of Hastinapur and father of Lord Kunthunath 64.19
**Shurasen:** King of Shouryadesh 71.202
**Shurasen:** Seventh son of Bhanudatta 71.204
**Shrigala** (like a jackal) -  Vyas 59.221
**Shyamalata:**  Servant of Suramari 75.349
**Shyamarata:** Daughter of the King of Magadh 70.251
**Shyamala:**  Woman with the speed of wind, expert in Vidya 71.369
**Shyenak:**  Kotwal (police chief) of Ayodhya 70.154
**Shri:**  A Goddess 54.169
**Shri:**  A Goddess 63.1200
**Shrikant:**  Son of Shrivarma 54.80
**Shrikant:**  The upcoming seventh Chakravarti 76.483
**Shrikanta:**  Wife of Shreshena, King of Dhurnagar in Sugandhi Desh 
**Shrichandra:**  Son of King Sumitra and Queen Vasundhara 75.439
**Shrichandra:**  Of Ndahadya 75.52
**Shridatta:**  Son of Vijay 62.408
**Shridatta:**  Ratnapur, son of Vaishravana Seth and Gotama Seth 67.193
**Shridatta:**  Son of King Siddha 69.14
**Shridatta:**  Daughter of Devli Vaishya Bandhusri of Shankhanagar, wife of Dhantho 62.1495
**Shridatta:**  Wife of Dhanamitra Vanik of Vidhyapur Nagar 63.10
**Shridatta:**  Wife of Somatapa, who lived on the banks of Panamkanta River 63.267
**Shridatta:**  Wife of Dhanpal 75.258
**Shridhar:**  Dev of Shreeprabha Vimana in the first heaven, son of Shrivarma 54.82
**Shridhar:**  A Muni Raja 54.143
**Shridhar:**  King of Bhogavardhan Nagar 58.191
**Shridhar:**  Dev of Ravigy Vimana in the Sahasrar heaven, son of King Singhsen 59.219
**Shridhar:**  King of Jayantpur 71.1453
**Shridhar:**  A Muni Raja 74.91
**Shridhara:**  Daughter of Ativega Vidhyadhar, wife of Ramdatta 59.229
**Shridharma:**  Son of King Shrivarma and Queen Susima of Ayodhya, son of Vibhishan Narayan 59.283
**Shrinadi:**  A river 63.3158
**Shrinag:**  A Muni 66.13
**Shrinagajin:**  32nd Muni 67.85
**Shrinagdatta:**  A Vaishya 75.123
**Shripadm:**  A Muni with four Riddhis 54.73
**Shripann:**  Son of King Shambar and Shrimati of Suprakarpur 71.1409
**Shriprabha:**  A Muni Raja 54.181
**Shripram:**  Dev of Paudharma Swarga, son of King Shripena 62.365
**Shribhuti:**  Minister of King Singhsen, also known as Satyagosh 59.147
**Shribhuti:**  The upcoming sixth Chakravarti 76.483
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Mahabal of Kaushambi 62.351
**Shrimati:**  Wife of Shatabindu 65.60
**Shrimati:**  Sister of King Parat 65.60
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Vishavavsuki of Swastikavati 67.250
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Shrichandra of Hastinapur 70.52
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Vasab of Kundalpur in Vidarbha Desh 71.1341
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Shambar of Suprakarpur 71.1409
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Shridhar of Jayantpur 71.453
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Hiranyavarman of Adhishtpur 71.1457
**Shrimati:**  Wife of King Kunik, mother of Shrenik 74.418
**Shrimati:**  Of Sagar 75.258
**Shrimati:**  Second wife of Harival 76.264
**Shrikanta:**  Daughter of King Mahabal and Shrimati of Kaushambi 62.351
**Shrikanta:**  Wife of King Shurasen of Hastinapur, mother of Lord Kunthunath 64.13
**Shrikanta:**  Wife of King Harishena of Nandapur 71.254
**Shrikanta:**  Daughter of King Ashok and Sobhashri of Pundarikin Nagar, wife of Krishna's Sumima Patrani 71.394
**Shrikanta:**  Wife of King Shreshena of Saketanagar 72.254
**Shrichandra:**  King of Hastinapur in Kurujangal Desh 70.51
**Shrichandra:**  The upcoming ninth Balabhadra 76.486

Page #728:
---------------------------
## Uttarapurana

**Shreyaskara-Bhagavan Shreyansanath** - Son of the 11th Tirthankara, Shreyans, 57.46

**Shreevardhaman-Bhagavan Mahavira** - Son of King Shreevarma and Queen Shreekant, 74.278

**Shreevarma** - King of Ayodhya, 59.283

**Shreevijaya** - Son of Tripruasthanarayana and Swayamprabha, 62.1153

**Shreevijaya-Vijay Balabhadra** - Son of Shreevijaya, 62.165

**Shreeshena** - King of Shripur, Sugandhi Desh, 54.36

**Shrepena** - King of Ratnapura, 62.340

**Shrepena** - King of Shripur, 54.36

**Shreshthi-Graagami** - The 7th Tirthankara, 76.3472

**Shwetakarn** - An elephant, 63.3158

**Shwetaram** - Son of Jamadagni and Renuki, 65.192

**Shwetvahan** - King of Champapur, 76.18

**Shreshana** - King of Saketa Nagar, 72.254

**Shrepena** - King of Champapuri, Angadesh, 75.182

**Shrepena** - Friend of Harivikram, a Vanraja, 75.482

**Shrepena** - The upcoming 5th Chakravarti, 76.6462

**Shrepena** - Wife of Pahsrayudh, 76.6462

**Pandavan** - A forest where Bhagavan Mahavira took Diksha, 74.302

**Sagara** - The 2nd Chakravarti. He is mentioned in the Tirth of Bhagavan Ajitanath. There are 12 Chakravartis in every Utsarpini and Avasarpini Yuga, 48.57

**Sagara** - King of Ayodhya, 67.157

**Sangamak** - A Dev, 74.289

**Sanjaya** - A Charan Muni with Riddhi, 74.282

**Sanjayant** - King of Veetashoka Nagar, son of Vaijayant, 59.110

**Sanjayant** - A Dhyanast Muni, 59.110

**Satyadatt** - The main questioner of Bhagavan Dharmanath, 76.1531

**Satyandhar** - King of Rajpur Nagar, Hemaangad Desh, 75.189

**Satyabhama** - Daughter of Satyak Brahman, Ratnapura, wife of Kapil, 62.331

**Satyabhama** - A Patrani of Krishna, 71.126

**Satyavati** - Wife of Parashar, 70.103

**Satyaviya** - The main questioner of Bhagavan Sambhavanath, 76.529

**Sanarkumar** - A Chakravarti named Sanatkumar, 61.105

**Santanak** - A Mala that Lakshman received during Digvijaya, 68.1654

**Sanmati** - Bhagavan Mahavira, 73.2

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 63.249

**Samadhigupta** - A Tirthankara, 66.94

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 71.318

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 71.1445

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 72.0242

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 73.28

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 74.39

**Samadhigupta** - A Muni, 75.470

**Samadhigupta** - The upcoming 18th Tirthankara, 76.480

**Samudragupta** - A Muni, 73.163

**Samudravijaya** - King of Saketa Nagar, Kaushal Desh, 48.71

**Samudravijaya** - Son of Adhik Vrishti and Subhadra, 70.95

**Samudravijaya** - King of Dwaravati, father of Bhagavan Nemnath, 71.30

**Samudrasen** - A Vidhyadhar Raja, the owner of Vastvoksarapur, 63.118

**Shreeshena** - King of Saketa Nagar, daughter of Thapena and Queen Shreekant, 72.254

**Shratdhar** - A Muni, 67.262

**Shruta Sagar** - Minister of Jwalanajati, 62.69

**Shruta Sagar** - A Muni, 74.233

**Shrenik** - King of Magadh, the main listener of Bhagavan Mahavira's Samavasaran, 48.057

**Shrenik** - The upcoming 1st Tirthankara, 76.471

**Shrenik** - The main questioner of Bhagavan Mahavira, 76.532

**Shreyas** - The 11th Tirthankara, 62.91

**Sanjayant** - A Kevali, 62.0274

**Satyak** - A Brahman of Ratnapura, 62.1329

**Satyak** - A Raja of the Yadava side, 71.74

**Satyak** - A Muni of the Sangha of Muni Raja named Nandivardhan, 72.10

**Satyak** - King of Mahipur, Gandhar Desh, 75.13

Page #729:
---------------------------
##  Personal Noun Dictionary
701
Samudra-sena - A Muni 70.174 || Sammav - Third Tirthankara 49.1 Samminn - Jyotiprabha Nagar's King 62.124.1 Sammin - Amitatejaka's servant, a Vidyadhara 62.264 Sambhut - A Muni 57.178 Sambhut - A Muni 65.53 Sambhut - A Tirthankara 66.123 Sambhut - A Muni 74.110 Sarvakalyani - Jyotiprabha Nagar's King, Sambhin's wife - 62.242 Sarvagupt - A Kevali 59.7 Sarvagupt - A Muni Raja 63.0247 Sarvamitra - Priyamitra's son 74.239 Sarvagupt - A Kevali 62.496 Sarvayashas - Trina Pingala's wife 67.4224 Sarvasri - Vitashoka Nagar's elephant, Vaijayanti's wife 59.110 Sarvasri - Meshapur's King Dhanajaya's wife 71.4253 Sarvasri - Panchma Kala's final Ayika 76.1433 Sarvasamriddh - A Vaishya 76.168 Sarvatmamat - The upcoming fifth Tirthankara 76.1478 Sarvarthasiddhi - Bhagavan Shanti Nayaki's Palaki 63.1470 Sahadeva - Pandu and Madri's second son 70.116 Sahadeva - Dhandeva's second wife's son 75.110 Sahadevi - Ayodhya's King Banant'virya's wife, Sanatkumar Chakravarti's mother 61.105 Sahasragriva - Mesha Kuta's King, a Vidyadhara 68.8 Sahasraghoṣa - Prashnighoṣa's son .6.2.276 Sahasrabahu - Kaushala Deshi Saketa 1. Saraswat Nagari's King 65.57. 2. Aditya Sahasrarashmi - Vijay's elder son 3. Agni 62.273 4. Arun Sahasrayudha - Vajrayudha and Lakshmi's son 63.145 5. Gardatoy 6. Tusit Sagar - A Muni 71.435 7. Avyavadha and Sagar-Rajpur's Shravak 8. Arisht 75.257 These Devas go only to Bhagavan's Diksha Sagar - Bhagavan Ajitanatha's Kalyanak 48.34 Time's main questioner Sarvabhoum - Bhagavan Mallinatha 76.1529's main questioner 76.532 Sagardatta - Rajpur's Seth Siddhartha - Kaushambi's King 75/586 Parthiv and his Queen Sagardatta - Rajagrihi's Seth Sundari's son 69.4 76.46 Siddhartha - Kundapur's King Sagardatta - A Kevali Muni, Bhagavan Mahavira's father 76.134 74.252 Sagardatta - Supratishthapur's Seth, Dashapurva's holder 76.217 Muni 76.522 Sagar-sena - A Muni 62.187 Siddharthanandan - Bhagavan Mahavira Sagar-sena - Padmini Khet Nagar's Seth 62.263 Siddhartha - Raja Swayamvara's wife - Bhagavan Abhinandan Sagar-sena - A Muni 71.402 Nath's mother 50.17 Sagar-sena - A Jinendra 75.1316. Singh - Bhayankar Palli's Swami Sagar-sena - A Muni 74:17 Sagar-sena - A Muni 76.221 Singh - A Bhil King 75.148 Sagar-sena - Shikhi Bhudhar Parvat, a Muni Raja residing on the mountain 76.324 Singhketu - Bhogapur's King Prabh, Jan and Rani Mubandupa's son - Seth Sumukh's Jeeva Sanukampa - Yakshdas and Yaksh Datta's Yakshil named son 70/75 Singhketu - Bhagavan Mahavira Swami's prevalent second name 71.280's previous birth's Jeeva 76.540 Samsamriddh - Rajgriha's Seth Singhchandra - Bhadramitra's Jeeva 76.135 Rani Ramdatta's son 71.73 Saran - Yadav Paksh's King 59.192 Singhchandra - A Muni 59.227 Singhchandra - The upcoming fifth heaven-dwelling Deva, Bhadra 76.1486, who is detached from the world. These have eight castes: Singhnandita - Raja Shreshena's wife 62.340

Page #730:
---------------------------
702
Uttarapurana
Singhamadra-Raja Chetak's son
7515 Singhastha-Gaganavallabha Nagar's
Raja 62.66 Singhastha-Kundalapura's Raja
621178 Simharath-Vidyu-danstra and Anil
Vega's son 631249 Simharath-Raja Rajagupta's
Jiva 63.249 Simharath-Vatsadesh's . Susima
Nagari's Raja 64.3 Simharath-Podanapura's Raja
Jarasandha's enemy 706353 Singhastha-One Raja 711449 Singhvikram-Sagar Chakravarti's Vidarbha named stroka's father 485127 Singhshabdantpurusha-Purushasingh
named Narayana 61156 Singhsen-Bhagavan Ajitanath
's chief Ganadhar 48.43 Singhsen-Singhapura's Raja
59.146 Singhsen-Khagapura Nagar's Raja
61.70 Singhsen-Pundaririini Nagari's
Raja 633334 Sita-Khangapura's Raja Som
Prabh's wife 67.142 Sita-Mithila's Raja Janak and his Vasudha Devi Rani's daughter 671167 Sita-Gavan and his Rani
Mandodari's daughter 68527 Simankara-One Muni 63.108 Simandhar-Bhagavan Shitalnath
's chief questioner 76530 Sukanth-Alka's Raja Mayurgreev's Jiva 62159 Sukata-Kinnaragit Nagar's
Raja Chitrachul Vidyadhar's daughter 63193 Sukanta-Vayuveg's wife
63394 Sukundali-Badityamanagar's
Raja 62362 Sukumari-Nagashri's Jiva 72.244 Sukummoj-Raja Chetak's son 7515 Suketu-Raja Chetak's son 59/72 Suketu-One Raja 64180 Suketu-One Vidyadhar 6680 Suketu-Rachanapura Nagar's Raja
710313 Sugreev-Kakandhi's Raja Bhagavan Pushpadant's father 55.24 Sugreev-Balindra and Priyangu
Sundari's son 68.273 Sughoosh-Ashanighosh's son
62.276 Sughoosh-Kanakdhi's brother
62.503 Sughoosha-One Veena 75.327 Suchandra-Upcoming eighth Bal
Badra 76.486 Sujyeshta-Surashtrvardhan Raja's wife-Susima Pattrani's mother 71.397 Sutara-Arkakiriti and Jyoti Mala's daughter 621152 Sudatt-Pakhetpura's one Seth
59.148 Sudatt-Vindhyapura's Ghanamitra
Vanik and Shridatta wife's son 63.101 Sudatt-Kalingadesh's Kanchi. Nagari's resident one Vanik's son 70.127
Sudatt-Ayodhya's Raja Pushpadant and Rani Preethinkari's son 711257 Sudatt-Raja Chetak's son 754 Sudarshan-Bhagavan Dharmanath's Tirth's Balabhadra 61656 Sudarshan-Hastinapura's Raja Bhagavan Barnath's father 65.15 Sudarshan-Lakshman's Chakra Ratna
68.675 Sudarshan-One Dev, who had done Upa-sarg to the Su-pratistha Muni situated on Gandhamadana Parvat with Pratima-yo-yase 70.123 Sudarshan-One Yaksha-Kutta's
Jiva 75362 Sudashna-Khangapura's Raja Som
Prabh's wife 67.142 Sudarshana-One Ayika
70.190 Sudarshana-Vidyunmali Indra's
Devi 76||33 Sudarshanaacharya-One
Muni 59282 Surashti-Su-pratistha's son 70156 Surashti-Yadavpaksh's one Raja
7174 Sudristi-Madrilpura Nagar's Seth
71.293 Sudharm-Bhagavan Dharmanath's son
61137 Sudharm-One Muni 622372 Sudharm-One Muni 71.272 Sudharm-Magavan Mahavira's
Ganadhar 741373 Sudharma-Bhagavan Mahavira Swami's one Ganadhar 75.185 Sudharmaacharya-One Muni 701141

Page #731:
---------------------------
Sunanda - The Yaksha residing on Kotishila Parvat, Sunanda Raja, son of Ganga Dev and Nandayasha 71.263. Sunanda - The soul of the tenth Tirthankara to come 76.472. Sunanda - The queen of Raja Dridharath of Bhadrapur, the mother of Lord Shitalnath 56.24. Sunanda - The wife of Supritishtha 70.52. Sunita - The wife of Vijay 70.199. Sundar - The king of a great city, who gave the first offering to Lord Vasupujya 58.40. Sundari - The wife of the king of Chakrapur, Apt 59/239. Sundari - The wife of the king of Chatrapur, Pritimi 59.255. Sundari - The wife of the king of Kosambi 69.4. Sundari - The wife of Harivikram Bhillraj 75.479. Sundari - The wife of Mahasevi Raja 76.265. Supaashva - The seventh Tirthankara 53.1. Supaarshva - The soul of the second Tirthankara to come 76.471. Supaashva - The third Tirthankara to come 76.477. Suputra - The son of Raja Nalin of Kshempur 57.12. Supritishtha - The father of Lord Supaaparna, the king of Varanasi 53.19. Suprasiddha - The son of Shrichandra, the king of Hastinapur, and Rani Shrimati 70.152. Suprasiddha - A Muni 70.119. Suprabuddha - The daughter of Raja Parindam and Rani Shrimati, the mother of Agnibhuti and Vayubhuti, the soul of Agnilaka 72.34. Supram - The wife of Raja Soma Prabh of Khangpur, the son of Sudarshana 67.142. Supram - The Push of Lord Navinath 69/52. Suprabh - The chief Ganadhar of Lord Naminath 69.60. Suprama - The wife of Raja Bhanu, the mother of Lord Dharmanath 61.14. Suprama - A Ganini 62.508. Suprabha - The wife of Raja Sendraketu of Vasyalaya 63.251. Suprama - The wife of Aminandan 70.199. Suprama - The wife of Vajra Vaidya of Pundarikin Nagar 71.366. Suprabha - The Devi of Soudharmendra 72/251. Suprabha - The daughter of Raja Petak 75/6. Supramashivika - The palanquin in which Lord Ajitnath went for tapasya 48.38. Subandhu - A Muni 65.116. Subandhu - A Vaishya of Champapur 72.243. Subala - The queen of Raja Samudra Vijay of Saketa Nagar, Kaushal Desh 48.71. Suvaka - The wife of Raja Dasarak of Varanasi 67.148. Subuddhi - A Mantri 62/201. Sum - A Baith of Shempur Nagar 75.410. 703. Subhadra - A Muni, the knower of Adharang 76.525. Sumdra - The wife of Raja Brahma of Dwaravati 58.83. Subhadra - The wife of Raja Bhadra of Dwaravati, the mother of Dharma Balabhadra 59.71. Subhadra - The wife of Raja Chandraabh of Dyutilakanagar 62/36. Subhadra - The wife of Anyakadrishti 70.95. Subhadra - The wife of Vyasa 70.1103. Subhadra - The wife of Raja Meghrath of Bhadravilpur 70.183. Subhadra - An Arthika 71.423. Sumdra - The wife of Sumati Seth of Kaushambi 71.437. Subhadra - A wife of Arjun 72.214. Subhadra - The wife of Raja Chandraabh Vidyadhar of Yutilakanagar 74.114. Subhadra - The wife of Vrishabhadatta Seth 74.341. Sumdra - The wife of Raja Chetak of Vaishali 75.4. Suma - The wife of Raja Vajrachaap of Vasyalaya 70.76. Sumaj - The brother-in-law of Kansa 70:448. Subhanu - The elder son of Bhanudatta Seth 71.202. Subhanu - The son of Krishna and Satyabhama 72.174. Sumeem - A Chakravarti 65.51. Subheem - The chief questioner of Lord Dharmanath 76/532. Sumeemkumar - Parshvanath 73.103. Sumati - The fifth Tirthankara 51.1. Sumati - The son of Lord Pushpadant 55/45.

Page #732:
---------------------------
## Uttarapurana

**Suमति:**
* Queen of King Divyabala (59.208)
* Minister of King Jwalanajato (62.81)
* Son of Vijayarana, born to Aparajit Balabhadra (62.81)
* A Seth of Kaushambi (70.65)
* Wife of Dridha Ragha (63.147)
* An Adhika (63.175)
* Daughter of Vajra and Suprabha (63.175)
* A Seth of Kaushambi (71.437)

**Sumandar:**
* A Muni (70.53)
* A Tirthankara of Videha (70.57)

**Sumitra:**
* Son of Aparajit, King of Sushima Nagar in Vatsadesh (52.12)
* A Gaja of Rajgriha Nagar (61.157)
* Father of King Maghavan Chakravarti, King of Saketa Nagar in Kaushaldesh (61.192)
* A King who hosted the first meal of Lord Shantinath (63.479)
* Father of Lord Munisuvratnath, King of Rajgriha Nagar (67.20)
* King of Pundarikini Nagar in Pushkalavati Desh, located in the eastern direction of Vatakikhand (74.236)
* Brother-in-law of Jeevandhar (75.430)
* King of Nagarshobha Nagar, brother of Dridhamitra (75.439)

**Sumitra:**
* Wife of Sudatt Seth of Pakhetpur (59.148)
* Mother of Bhadramitra (59.5189)

**Surguru:**
* King of Kundalpur, Singh Ratha Purohit (62.1178)
* A Charan, Riddhi-dhari Muni (70.137)

**Suredev:**
* The upcoming second Tirthankara (76.477)

**Suramajri:**
* Daughter of Vaishravana Seth and Amramnjari Sethani of Rajpur (75.348)

**Surashtrvardhan:**
* Father of Queen Sumima (71.396)

**Surup:**
* Vyantar Dev of Devaraman Van (63.278)

**Surupa:**
* A Devi (63.2285)
* Daughter of King Vidyudveg and Queen Vidyudvega of Gaganavallabh Nagar (71.420)

**Surendradatt:**
* A Seth of Ayodhya Nagar in Vinita, Jambudweep (70.147)
* King of Shravasti, who gave the first meal to Lord Sambhavnath (49.39)

**Sullakshana:**
* Wife of Ativeg Vidyapa (59.229)
* A Ganini (62.112)
* Wife of Rana Vindhyasen of Vindhyapur (63.100)
* Wife of King Susthit of Podanpur (70.139)

**Solsa:**
* A girl who became the wife of King Sagar by walking in a garden (67.1158)
* Daughter of King Suyodhan and Atithi (67.1214)

**Sulochana:**
* A prominent Ayika of Lord Parshvanath's Sangha (73.153)

**Suvarnakumbha:**
* A Muni (57.96)
* A Muni who initiated Vijay Balabhadra (62.167)

**Suvarnatilka:**
* Son of Sihar (63.252)

**Suvarnatilka:**
* Wife of King Abhayghosh of Tilkanagar (63.169)

**Suvarnatejas:**
* Son of Kanakatejas and Chandramala, a Vaishya of Rajpur (75.453)

**Suvarndaraka:**
* A Mridanga player (76.90)

**Suvarnanam:**
* Son of Rasha Kanakaprabha (54.141)

**Suvarnayaks:**
* A Vyantar Dev (72.17)

**Suvarnavarn:**
* King of Veerpur (69.56)

**Suvarnavarma:**
* King of Kantpur in Bangdesh (75.81)

**Suvidhi:**
* The ninth Tirthankara, also known as Pushpadant (58.81)

**Suveg:**
* Son of Vijay (62.272)

**Suvega:**
* Daughter of King Pavanveg of Shivankaranagar (75.164)

**Suvrat:**
* A Jineendra named Suvrat (58.81)

**Subat:**
* A Tirthankara of Videha (58.81)

Page #733:
---------------------------
Sumat - a Jina, Suvrat - a Muni 72.246 Sujinadhip - a Jina named Sukha 58.76
Suvas - the wife of King Baddas of Ayodhya city, a poor country located in the west of Videha in the Ghataki Khand 59.277 Suvrata - a Ganini 62.498 Suvata - a Bawis 63.23 Suvrata - an Arthika 63-109 Suvrata - a Bawika 701408. Suma - a Bawika 71.288 Subrata - a Badhika 71.367 Suta - an Aavika 72.249 Sumana - the wife of King Sumitra of the city of Pundarika in the Purvaghataki Khand 74.236
One
Suvratananti - one
75 319 Supeṇ - Kamarupurava 58.61
63.103

76.165
Prayika
Raja
Raja
Supeṇ - the son of Wadava of Aristapura and Queen Vasumati 71.401
Raja
Susheṇa - the wife of King Dridha Raja of Shravasti - the mother of Bhagavan Sambhavnath 49.15 Susheṇa - the daughter of Meghrath's wife 63.120 Susima - the queen of Charan of Kaushambi - the mother of Bhagavan Padmaprabha 52:19 Susima - the wife of King Shrama of Ayodhya in the Airavat Kshetra 59.283 Suloma - a queen of Krishna 71 126 Susthit - the king of Podanapura 70.119
Person-specific word list
Sushrut - the minister of Jwalanji Vidhyadhar 62.57 Suradat - a merchant living in Kalonagari of the Faliling country 70.127 Suradat Bar - the life of Suradat 70.149
Surpanakha - the sister of Ravana
68-124
Surasen - the king of Shauryapura 70 193
Suryapram - the king of Suryaprabha city, related to Videha in the west of Pushkarardha 70128
Suryapram - the life of King Raghu, who became a Dev in the Sopaman heaven
70180
Surya - a Dev, the life of Bhagavan Mahavira in his previous birth 76.542
Suryaprabha - the wife of Bhagavan Pushpadanta 55046 Suryavart - the king of Pushkarapura city
59.230
Suryoday - the powder of Gunamala
75 352 Sendraketu - the king of Vasvalaya city 62.251
Sevak - the life of the twelfth Tirthankara 76473 Saindhav - the servant of Harivkram
75.480
Som - a Parivrat living in Sihpur 62.202 Som - a Tapas living on the banks of the Ka-Ta river 63.267 Som - a Brahmin of Lakshmigram 71.317
Somdat - the king of Vardhmannagar, where Bhagavan Padmaprabha had his first meal 5 2254

705 Somdat - the king of Nalinnagar, who gave Bhagavan Chandraprabha his first meal 54218
Somdat - the son of Somila, a Brahmin of Somdevpura 72.228 Somdev - a Brahmin living in Shaligram of Magadhdesh 71.3
-
Somdevapuri - one
Brahmin 72.228 Somprabhangapura - the king of 67 : 142 Somprama - the wife of King Kanakprabha 54 141 Sombhuti - the son of Somdev Brahmin of Champapur 72.229 Somsharma - the maternal uncle of the disciple of Nimittgyani 62.192 Somsharma - a Brahmin of Palashkut Gram 70/200 Somsharma - the father of Sobik, the wife of Shivbhuti 75॥73 Somshri - the wife of Chandakoushik Vipra, a resident of Kumbhkarkat city 62.214
Somshri - the wife of King Ashok of Pundarikini city 71.394 Soma - the wife of King Sumitra of Rajgriha - the mother of Bhagavan Munisuvratnath 67.21
Somil - a son of King Simdev of Champapur 72/228 Somila - the wife of Somdev Brahmin of Champapur 72/228 Somila - the wife of Somdev Brahmin 74,229
Somila - the wife of Shivbhuti 75.73
Saunandak - the brother of Lakshman 68946

Page #734:
---------------------------
706
Uttarapurana
Sthimitasagara-Jambudvipa-Vatsa-  
Swamyaprama-Raja Chandrama and Kavati desh ki Prabhakaripurika Subhadraki putri 74.135. Raja 621412
Swambhu-Bhagavan Vimlanayake Sthimitasagara-Andhakavrusti and
Samayame honevale ek Chakravarti
59.63 Subhadraka putra 70.95 Sthavar-Sandilya and Par
Swambhu-Videhake Tirthankar Sarika putra 74.83
59.111 Sthavar-Bhagavan Mahavirake purva
Swambhu-Bhagavan Kunthunathaka bhavaka jiva 76.538
Pramukh Ganadhar 64.44 Sthungandh-Godanpurke Raja
Swambhu-Bhagavan Parsvanathaka Chandradhatake putra Indravarmaka
Pramukh Ganadhar 733149 Pratidvandvi 722205
Swambhu-Bagami unnisave
Tirthankar 76648. Smar-Pradyumna 72.169
Swambhu-Bhagavan Vasupujyaka Smaratarangini-ek shayya
Mukhya prashnakarta 76530 75.434
Swambhu-Keshav-Swambhunamaka Swamyaprabha-Videhake ek tirth
Narayan 71298 kar 497
Swayamvar-Bharat kshetrake Saketa Swamyaprama-ek Tirthankar 54194
Bagarka Raja-Bhagavan Swamyaprama-Videhake ek tirth
Abhinandananashaka pita kar 622425
50.17 Swamyaprabha-Videhake Tithankar
Swarnachool-ek dev-Vijayaka 621507
Jiva 67.146 Swamyaprama-Jambudvipa Videhakshetra
Swarmanu-Subhanuka namantaar ko Pundarikininagarike ek
70.451 Tirthankar 70.42
Swamihit-Ayodhyake Raja Swamyaprama-Swamyaprabhadvipaka ek
Vajavahaka Mantri 73.4 Dev 71.452 Swamyaprama-Videhake ek Tirthankar 72069
Hayakandhar-Yashgreevka dusara Swamyaprama-aagami chauthe tirth
Naam 57.100 kar 765478
Hayagreev-Ashvagrovka dusara Swamyaprama-Jwalanajati and
Naam 62.142. Vayuvegaki putri 62144
Hari-Shrikrishna 7115 Swamyaprabha-Himavan ki stri
Harigiri-Champapurke Raja 70.98
Markandeyaki santan 70.91 Swamyaprama-Rathnapur nagarke Harichandra-ek Charan Ridhiraja Suketu ko stro-saty. Pari muni 511233 Bhamaki mata 711313 Harichandra-Bagami Pausha bal- Swamyaprama-Swamyaprabhadeviki ek Bhadra 761486 Devi 711451
Hariputra-Pradyumna 72.113
Haribal-Raja Purushal Chaur Jyotirmaala ka putra 71.311 Harivak-Alakaka niwasi - ek vidyadhar 766263 Harivarma-Angadesh-Bamapurka
Raja-Munisuvra Nayaka tritiya purvam av 62 Harivahan-Mandpurke Raja Harishen and Rani Shrikantka putra 710254 Harivahan-ek vidyadhar bise Kanakamasane swayamvarme vara pa 711406 Harivikram-ek bhiloka raja
75.478 Harisharma-ek Brahman 6561 Harishmashru-Ashvagreevka Mantri
62061 Harishen-Mamavan Munisuvratnath.
Tirth me hua ek Chakravarti 67.61 Harishen-Nandpurka Raja
710254 Harishen-Hastishirshpur nagar ka
Raja 71444 Harishen-Raja Vajrasen bor
Rani Shilvati ka putra 74.232 Harishen-Bhagavan Mahaviraka
Purvabhavaka jiva 761541 Harishenaguru-ek muni 674236 Hariveja-ek Aryika 631493 Harishena-Shrishen
Bour Shrikansa ki putri 722254 Himgiri-Pampapurke Raja
Makambhayko santan 191 Himavan-Bandhakavrusti and
Subhadrakasutra 796 Hiranyamati-ek bayika, jo
Rani Ramdatta ko samboshane ke liye payi pi 59.199

Page #735:
---------------------------
Hiranyaloma - the wife of Somasharma
62.192
King
. Hiranyavati - the daughter of the divine power of Saketa and his queen Sumati, this is the life of the Mrigayana Brahmin or 59209 Hiranyavarman, the king of Barishtapur 71.458

Personal Noun Lexicon
Hiranyavarman - son born from the wife of Haribala 76.264
A king of the Hempratmarasanka party 71.77 Hemarath - a king killed by a chariot in the Damitarica war 63.265
Strong

707
Hemaangad - a king 63.181 of Hemapuzhagpur 710430
King
Hemamanagar - a city of Sujan country 75.420
Hemama, the daughter of King Mitra and Navina 75/421 Hi - a goddess 54.169

Page #736:
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate it into English.

Page #737:
---------------------------
Published by Bharatiya Jnanpith
Purana and Charit-Kavya Granth Adipurana (Sanskrit-Hindi) Parts 1, 2
- Acharya Jinsen Uttarapurana (Sanskrit-Hindi)
- Acharya Gunabhadra Harivanshapurana (Sanskrit-Hindi)
- Acharya Jinsen Padmapurana (Sanskrit-Hindi) Parts 1, 2, 3
Acharya Ravishena Paumachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi) in five parts
- Kavi Swayambhu Virajinindachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
- Mahakavi Pushpadanta Mahapurana (Apabhramsha-Hindi) Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
– Mahakavi Pushpadanta Nayakumarachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
– Mahakavi Pushpadanta Jasaharachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
– Mahakavi Pushpadanta Viravardhamanacharit (Sanskrit-Hindi)
– Bhattarak Sakalakirti Vaddhamanachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
- Vibudh Shridhar Jambusamicariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
- Kavi Vir Karakandachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
— Kankaamar Siribalachariu (Apabhramsha-Hindi)
- Narsenadeva Purudeva Champu (Sanskrit-Hindi)
- Arhaddas Dharmasharmabhyudaya
- Harichandra Ritthanemicariu (Yadavakanda)
- Kavi Swayambhu Samaraicchakhaha (Prakrit, Sanskrit Chhaya, Hindi)
- Haribhadra Suri
Education International

Page #738:
---------------------------
**Bharatiya Jnanpith Foundation:** Established in 1944. Objective: Research and publication of lost, unavailable and unpublished material of knowledge and creation of public welfare original literature. Founder: Late Sahu Shantiprasad Jain, Late Smt. Rama Jain. President: Smt. Indu Jain. Office: 18, Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003.  or Private & Personal Use Only www.jairelibrary.org

